INT. DARKENED ROOM - DAY

The blade of a knife.

Pulled from its sheath, intricate tribal etchings on the blade catching the light.

The blade being pulled across a sharpening stone. Swoosh-swoosh-swoosh. Rhythmic. A well-practiced hand. A muscular, tattooed arm.

The blade held up. Razor sharp. The glow of a TV in the darkened room is the only illumination. We see images on the TV:

GLOBAL AND URBAN STRIFE slums barricades poverty starvation demonstrations repression refugee camps barbed wire prisons riot police tear gas violence...

Then the images settle to now, BREAKING NEWS:

FOOD RIOTS IN ROME. Images of a protest march. A crowd filling the streets. Soldiers moving into position. We see placards: "DOGS MUST EAT," "MEAT WAS MADE FOR MOUTHS." The man sharpening the knife watches the images. His eyes
are

cold. Almost disinterested.

Then he stops.
 
Frozen in mid-stroke.

Something on the TV suddenly rivets him.
His eyes no longer cold.

The TV shows one of the soldiers, a high-ranking officer. Imperious. Giving orders. We will come to know this is a man as Caius Martius -- Coriolanus.

TULLUS AUFIDIUS, the man sharpening the knife, gazes at the image on the screen.

He leans forward. Emerging from the darkness. We see his face.

He is a handsome and imposing figure, magnetic in his personality. Charismatic, yes, but also neurotic and edgy. Uncomfortable in his own skin. Some demons there.

He watches the face of Caius Martius on the TV screen.











2.

Then he puts the point of his knife against the screen.
Against Caius Martius' heart.

Holds it there Presses the point against the screen Muscles knotting in his forearm As if he could thrust the knife through the screen and into the heart of Caius Martius...

His nemesis His dark angel.
Sharp cut to--

EXT. ROME - STREET - DAY

We move with an intense woman down the street. She is nervous. Checks she is not being followed.

She is TAMORA, an extreme figure on the political landscape. To the Roman elite she is a dangerous anarchist -- to her supporters she is an ardent patriot and democrat. As she moves, we take in Rome.

It might be Mexico City. Or Chechnia. Or El Salvador. Or Detroit. Or Baghdad. Or London.

This Rome is a modern place. It is our world right now: immediately recognizable to us. Elements of classical architecture loom over decay. Monolithic modernism and brave public monuments are lost in a sea of brazen advertising billboards, neon shopping plazas and drab super-highways.
 
Splendor and squalor sit side-by-side.

It is a volatile, dangerous world.
William Shakespeare's Rome.

She comes to a graffiti-covered apartment building. Looks around. Enters.

INT. APARTMENT - DAY

A secret political meeting in a police state.

Tension. Cigarette smoke hangs in the air. Men and women gathered, hushed and urgent tones. A cell meeting of the political opposition, the resistance.

A TV shows the food marches elsewhere in the city. The gathering storm.
CASSIUS is a leading proletariat organizer:











3.

CASSIUS

Before we proceed any further, hear me speak -- You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?

The others agree. They are not wild-eyed radicals. They are normal people, from all walks of life. You and me.

CASSIUS

First, you know Caius Martius is chief enemy to the people.

A voice from the back of the room:

TAMORA

Let us kill him.

The others turn. Tamora, just entering, pulls off her coat, joins the others:

TAMORA

And we'll have corn at our own price. Is it a verdict?
Some are unsure. She is too extreme for some.

CASSIUS

(PRESSING SLIGHTLY)

We are accounted poor citizens, the
 

patricians good The leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, our sufferance, is a gain to them. Let us revenge this with our sticks ere we become rakes! I speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge. A woman, a YOUNG MOTHER, protests:

YOUNG MOTHER

Will you proceed especially against Caius Martius?

CASSIUS

Against him first.
A COLLEGE PROFESSOR, speaks up:

COLLEGE PROFESSOR

Consider you what services he has done for his country?

TAMORA

(SNAPS)
Very well, and could be content to give

(MORE)











4.

TAMORA (CONT'D)

him good report for it -- but that he pays himself with being proud.

COLLEGE PROFESSOR

Nay, but speak not maliciously.
She has over-played her hand. Pretends to back down:

TAMORA

I say unto you, what he hath done
famously, he did it to that end...
(a snarky smile)
He did it to please his mother.
Some laugh at her gossip.
Then the TV image switches to a BREAKING NEWS update:
 

From the Roman Senate. An august press room. A Senator is moving to a podium to make a statement.

He is Senator MENENIUS is a seasoned and wily politician. Silver hair, perfectly tailored suit. He is known as a
folksy
"man of the people." It is a role he plays to perfection.

CASSIUS

Soft, who comes here?

COLLEGE PROFESSOR

Worthy Senator Menenius, one that hath always loved the people.

TAMORA

He's one honest enough; would all the rest were so.

MENENIUS

(ON TV)

Why, masters, my good friends, mine
honest neighbors,
Will you undo yourselves?

(SMILES BENEVOLENTLY)

I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you,
For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as

WELL

Strike at the heavens with your staves as

LIFT THEM
Against the Roman state--











5.

TAMORA
(speaking to the TV)
Suffer us to famish, and their
storehouses crammed with grain--
The others shush her.
 

MENENIUS

(ON TV)
Alack, you are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you; and you

SLANDER

The helms of the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies--
Cassius mutes the TV. We see Senator Menenius continuing
with
his speech; his attempt to calm the dangerous situation.

CASSIUS
Care for us? They never cared for us yet!

TAMORA

If the wars eat us not up, they will: and that's all the love they bear us.
The others are growing increasingly restive -- shifting --

TENSION BUILDING--

CASSIUS

Why stay we prating here?

TAMORA
No more talking on it!
To the Capitol! Come! Come!

CUT TO--

EXT. STREETS - DAY

Tamora, Cassius and the others are now in the midst of the protest march. The crowd has become a mob, with a life and will of its own. The crowd surges forward--

They round a corner and suddenly stop-- For a formidable sight awaits them-

RIOT POLICE.

Rows of black uniforms. Full riot gear with plexiglass shields and dangerous truncheons.
 


6.

A few soldiers on horses as well.
The crowd starts and shifts nervously, unsure how to
proceed.
Should they launch themselves against this monolithic
military force?
A long, tense beat.
Then...
One of the horsemen trots forward...
He rides a beautiful white horse...
It is CAIUS MARTIUS. (Soon to be given the honorary title
Coriolanus.) He is intense and patrician. Uncompromising. A

man of steel. A soldier. He wears a crisp, military uniform.

From his position on the horse, Martius looks over the
rioters...
His gaze is ice...
A long beat...
Then he dismounts...
He slowly walks to the unruly mob...
With no hesitation, unarmed...
He stops before them...
And speaks with absolute disdain.

MARTIUS

What's the matter, you dissentious
rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your
opinion,

Make yourselves scabs?

CASSIUS

(SARCASTIC)
We have ever your good word.

MARTIUS

(SNAPS)

He that will give good words to thee will

FLATTER

Beneath abhorring.
The crowd is hushed. Taking in his every word.
 


7.

We note a TV news crew has moved into position and is
filming
eagerly. Some in the crowd film with cell phone cameras.
Streaming video. We intercut some of these perspectives.

MARTIUS

What would you have, you curs?
He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you

HARES;

Where foxes, geese.

He walks along the front of the crowd. Some are frightened
by

the great Martius. Some are even awed. Others glare at him with loathing.

MARTIUS

Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate...
Hang ye! Trust ye?

With every minute you do change your mind,

And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland.
He continues along the crowd, his cold eyes taking in face

AFTER FACE:

MARTIUS

What's the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble Senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which

ELSE

Would feed on one another?
He stops and glares at the mob with seething anger.

He climbs back onto his horse. Stares down at them.

AN ULTIMATUM:

MARTIUS

Go GET YOU HOME, YOU FRAGMENTS!
A tense beat.
The riot police shift nervously.
The crowd is unsure.
The TV news crew films everything.
 











8.
Cassius looks around. He sees the police ready with tear
gas.

He sees old men, women and children in his crowd. He doesn't want this to explode.
He exchanges a few whispers works with Tamora. Word is

passed
and the crowd begins to disperse. Some run off in a panic.
Others walk away.
The danger has passed.
Senator Menenius, who has been watching from nearby,
gestures

for Martius to join him. He is an old family friend of Martius' as well as his mentor and chief political advisor. Menenius is relieved bloodshed has been avoided.

MENENIUS

These are almost thoroughly persuaded; For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly.

MARTIUS

They are dissolved. Hang 'em.
Senator Menenius watches the crowd. Disturbed.

MENENIUS

I would they were abed.

MARTIUS

I would they were in Tiber.
They move off.

INT. DARKENED ROOM - DAY

We see the TV image of Martius railing at the people from

BEFORE:

MARTIUS

(ON TV)

Go GET YOU HOME, YOU FRAGMENTS!
 
Tullus Aufidius is leaning in. Watching so closely.

From his POV: the pixilated close-up of Martius' face on the screen.

He runs his knife blade back and forth. Turns it in the light; the reflection of Martius' face distorting as he rotates the blade.











9.
Then Aufidius leans back again.
Back into the shadows. Disappearing.

EXT. MILITARY COMMAND CENTER - DAY

Rome's military headquarters. A high security building like the Pentagon.

INT. ROMAN WAR ROOM - DAY

Martius is seated with several MILITARY OFFICERS and AIDES. Also with him is TITUS. He younger than Martius, an old friend and comrade-in-arms. Like Martius he has seen a lot
of
battle.

COMINIUS, an older general, enters. He is an experienced commander of men also used to dealing with the necessary politics of civilian oversight. West Point bearing. All salute. Cominius returns the salute.

COMINIUS

The news is the Volsces are in arms.

An aide presses a remote. Grainy video images play on a monitor: Volscian soldiers, jeeps, tanks.

One section shows a quick image of the rebel leader, a striking man called Tullus Aufidius, riding past in a jeep.

COMINIUS

They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to it.

MARTIUS
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
 
SENATOR

You have fought together?

MARTIUS
He is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.
Martius takes the remote control. Stops the video. Rewinds
to
the unclear image of Aufidius.











10.

MARTIUS

Titus Lartius, thou

Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus' face.

TITUS

Lead you on.
Martius rewinds and plays the image of Aufidius again,
rewinds and plays it again, almost obsessively.
We push in on the video image of Aufidius...

Aufidius appears to be staring right back at Martius...
And this takes us to...

INT. APARTMENT BUILDING-WAR ROOM - NIGHT

The same face.

Aufidius, who is the leader of the rebel Volscian forces, stands deep in thought.

The Volsces are an insurgent force challenging the monolithic

might of Rome: rebels that suggest to us Latin American revolutionaries or Hamas fighters or Chechnian separatists. They are a dangerous guerilla force.

We are in the Volsce war room in an old apartment building.
A
basement. No windows. Secure.

OFFICERS and some civilian POLITICIANS. The room is filled with military maps, weapons, surveillance photos.

VOLSCE POLITICIAN

So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our
 

COUNSELS

And know how we proceed.

AUFIDIUS

(SNAPS)

Is it not yours?

Tis not four days gone since I heard thence.

VOLSCE OFFICER

We never yet made doubt but Rome was

READY

To answer us.











11.

VOLSCE POLITICIAN

And it is rumored Martius, your old
enemy, leads in their preparation.

He tosses a glossy magazine on the desk, a picture of
Martius
on the cover.
Aufidius' eyes spark at the image of Martius.

He picks up the magazine and carefully tears off the cover picture of Martius, looking at the picture deeply. He continues with a strange and grim fire:

AUFIDIUS

If we and Caius Martius chance to meet, 'Tis sworn between us we shall ever

STRIKE

Till one can do no more.
By the elements,
If ever again I meet him beard to beard,
He's mine or I am his.

EXT. MARTIUS VILLA - DAY

A beautiful butterfly. Catching the light perfectly, almost iridescent.
 

It floats before a palatial mansion in the suburbs of the great city. Manicured lawns. Formal gardens. Classical architectural lines.

This fine home of aristocratic privilege seems a world away from the urban blight of Rome.

In the immaculate front gardens YOUNG MARTIUS, Martius' son, is playing. The boy is about ten. There is something grim

and
lonely about him, without charm.
Young Martius chases after the butterfly, trying to catch
it.
He fails. The butterfly flits away. Young Martius leaps
after
it. Again he misses.
Finally the frustrated boy manages to catch the butterfly.

In
his rage he tears it to pieces, brutally shredding it.
We realize he is being observed...

INT. MARTIUS VILLA -- LIVING ROOM - DAY

. VIRGILIA, Martius' wife, stands at the window. Disturbed by the sight of her son ripping apart the butterfly.











12.

She sees Young Martius stop and look at the tiny bit of
blood
on his fingers. Young Martius is unmoved. He glances up.
Locks eyes with his mother.
She turns away.

Virgilia was well-chosen for her role as wife to one of Rome's most aristocratic men. She is beautiful and graceful but -- like Diana thrown into lion's den of the Windsor family -- woefully out of her depth. We feel an inner fragility to her.

The room is spacious and elegantly appointed. A lovely Roman statue in one corner. This is a place of wealth, order and control.

A fine flat-screen TV flickers with images of war. We see helicopters zooming over desert landscape Imbedded war correspondents Tanks Combat Romans . Volscians.

VOLUMNIA, Martius' mother, stands and watches the TV. She is an imposing woman, handsome and tall, impeccably dressed. Adamantine in her strength.
 

Virgilia moves from the window. Sits on a sofa. She watches the TV news footage of the war, upset by the images. A frozen silence.

THEN:

VOLUMNIA

I pray you, daughter, sing, or express yourself in a more comfortable sort. If my son were my husband, I should more freely rejoice in that absence wherein he won honor than in the embracements of his bed where he would show most love.

She moves across the room to fetch a cigarette. She moves, always, with stately grace.

She walks past a series of photographs. They tell the story of Martius' life: the happy baby; the stern dead father; the rigid young military cadet; the formal wedding; the restrained and unsmiling adult.

In the photos we sense a transformation: innocent boy to experienced, severe looking soldier. Volumnia is present in most of the pictures.

AS:











13.

VOLUMNIA

When yet he was but tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, I, considering how honor would become such a person, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. She lights her cigarette.

VOLUMNIA

To a cruel war I sent him, from whence he returned, his brows bound with oak.

VIRGILIA

But had he died in the business, madam, how then?

VOLUMNIA
 

Then his good report should have been my son.

(she rivets Virgilia)

Had I a dozen sons I had rather have eleven die nobly for their country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.

A MAID enters. She speaks to Volumnia (the true mistress of the house) not to Virgilia.

MAID

Madam, Senator Menenius is come to visit you.

VOLUMNIA

Tell Menenius we are fit to bid him

welcome.
The Maid goes.

VIRGILIA

Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.

VOLUMNIA
Indeed, you shall not!

She turns off the TV and goes to a bar to mix drinks. She mixes the drinks aggressively, strangely inspired by the discussion of war:

VOLUMNIA

Methinks I hear hither your husband's

DRUM;

Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call

THUS:

(MORE)











14.

VOLUMNIA (CONT'D)

"Come on, you cowards! You were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome." His bloody
 

BROW

Then wiping, forth he goes.

VIRGILIA

His bloody brow? 0 Jupiter, no blood...

VOLUMNIA

Away, you fool! It more becomes a man
Than gold his trophy.

VIRGILIA

Heavens bless my lord from fell
Auf idius ...

VOLUMNIA

He'll beat Aufidius' head below his knee And tread upon his neck.

Senator Menenius enters, he is comfortable in this house and an old ally of Volumnia's.

MENENIUS

My ladies both, good day to you.

Volumnia hands him one of the drinks she has been mixing: a perfect martini. She knows how he takes his drink. She is

not
above flirting with him when it suits her ends.

MENENIUS
How do you both?

(TO VIRGILIA)

And how does your little son?

VIRGILIA
I thank you, sir; well, good.

VOLUMNIA

He had rather play with swords and hear a drum than look upon his schoolmaster.

MENENIUS

On my word, the father's son!
He and Volumnia laugh.
Menenius has sensed Virgilia's tension. Tries to cheer her:

MENENIUS

Come, I must have you play the idle
housewife with me this afternoon.
 







15.

VIRGILIA

No, good sir, I will not out of doors.

MENENIUS

Not out of doors!

VOLUMNIA

She shall, she shall.

VIRGILIA

Indeed, no, by your patience. I'll not over the threshold till my lord return from the wars.

MENENIUS
Fie, you confine yourself most
unreasonably.

VIRGILIA

I cannot go hither.

MENENIUS

(PLAYFULLY)

You would be another Penelope; yet they say all the yarn she spun in Ulysses' absence did but fill Ithaca full of moths.

VIRGILIA

No, good sir, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.

MENENIUS

Go with me and I'll tell you excellent news of your husband.

VIRGILIA

0, good sir, there can be none yet.

MENENIUS

There came news from him last night.
Volumnia pounces, moving in:
 
VOLUMNIA

Indeed?

MENENIUS

Your lord and Titus Lartius are set down before the Volscian city of Corioles. They nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars This is true, on mine honor; and so, I pray, go out with us.











16.

VIRGILIA

(AGAIN DECLINING)

Give me excuse, good sir. I will obey you in everything hereafter.

VOLUMNIA

(SNAPS)

Let her alone. As she is now, she will but disease our better mirth.
She takes Menenius arm and pulls him out, eager for more
news
of her son.
Virgilia sits for a beat.

Then she presses a button on the remote control. The TV goes on again. More news reports of the war.

We see images of the Volscian town of Corioles. A "BREAKING NEWS" scroll runs across the bottom of the screen The Battle for Corioles

Virgilia watches the war footage, her eyes haunted.
Hard cut to--

EXT. CORIOLES - DAY

BLAM! BLAM! BLAM! A series of explosions jolt us. Corioles is a small urban center. Smoke billows up from

areas

of the city. The steady crack and rattle of gunfire. The occasional thud of explosions.

We see urban street-to-street fighting. The images are startling in their familiarity: this could be Basra or
 
Belfast.

The battle is photographed in a gritty exposure. Color is drained out -- blood is a darker red like oil. Soldiers are dark forms moving through shadows and smoke.

Martius and Titus, leading a platoon of around twenty Roman SOLDIERS, run into view and take cover. Bullets zip and snap around them.

The Roman soldiers wear modern battle fatigues and body armor, tricked out with all the latest tech gear. The Volscians, being a poor guerilla force, wear thrown together uniforms that look almost tribal.

Martius calls over the incessant din of battle to Titus and

THE SOLDIERS:











17.

MARTIUS

They fear us not, but issue forth their city.

Sniper bullets slam into a wall near him. He coughs away the smoke and debris. This only makes him more angry:

MARTIUS

They do disdain us much beyond our
thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath!

He that retires, I'll take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge!

Martius leaps up and races on. The others follow in military order.

The Roman soldiers move along the street -- it is chaotic -- explosions, smoke and sniper fire -- they duck into doorways and behind abandoned cars -- returning fire as best they
can--

Martius leads -- firing stead bursts from his machine gun-- It is slow and bloody going--
Finally the Romans turn a corner and are stopped by a
roadblock: a burning bus that fills the entire street--

The Volsces use this roadblock to ambush the Roman soldiers-
-

We see glimpses of Volscian soldiers darting for position -- firing from rooftops and from inside shops--
 

BLISTERING CROSSFIRE--

INT. BLASTED HOTEL ROOM - DAY

Aufidius runs into a blasted hotel room. Some of his
soldiers
with him.

He goes to the window. Scans the street below. Sees Martius and the others trapped at the bus. He gestures to an aide
for

A	RADIO--

EXT. CORIOLES-STREET - DAY

In the face of the crossfire, the Roman soldiers start

FALLING BACK--

Martius refuses to yield -- pushing and shoving his men toward the burning bus -- screaming in fury over the noise:











18.

MARTIUS

You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men! PLUTO AND

HELL!

All hurt behind! Backs red, and faces

PALE

With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,

Or, by the fires of heaven, I'll leave

THE FOE

AND MAKE MY WARS ON YOU!

An EXPLOSION -- dirt and brick shards slash across Martius' face -- blood--

This only pushes his fury to white rage--

MARTIUS
 
Look to it. Come on!

FOLLOW ME!

He leaves his soldiers behind--
Moves alone to the burning bus and fights his way through
the

FLAMES--

Martius is in his own world now. He doesn't even realize he
is alone. He has become a sort of killing machine. A shark
moving through the ocean. Ruthless and efficient.
We become the warrior.
From Martius' POV:
We move through disorienting curtains of smoke...
Continue down the street...

Firing a heavy machine gun...
Volscian soldiers contort and die, torn to pieces by the
bullets...
The heavy machine gun is empty, we drop it and use a
sidearm,
firing strategic shots...
Volscian soldiers dart up -- fire -- and die...
We keep moving steadily forward...
Shadowy shapes moving nearby, we fire. Killing civilians.
The
fortunes of war...











19.

Strange surreal images. We smash into a house. An OLD MAN
crouches, terrified, in a corner. He reaches forward. He is
offering us water. An act of kindness amid the carnage...
We move on...
Panicked civilians, scattering in terror...
Volscian soldiers rush us, attacking, we slam them aside...

We duck down, roll under a car, emerge and fire...
More Volscians die...
We continue forward...

Then the pistol is empty, we drop it and pull a machete-like
knife...
Still moving relentlessly forward...
Slashing and killing...
Hand-to-hand now...
Carnage.
 
EXT. CORIOLES-ALLEY - DAY

Aufidius and his aides are racing down an alley, trying to get to Martius--
Roman fire stops them--

They return fire as they divert down another alley, trying for a better strategic position, running flat out--

EXT. CORIOLES - LATER

Titus and the soldiers are still pinned down at the burning bus. Two soldiers race back to Titus to report, they dive

for
cover.

TITUS
What is become of Martius?

SOLDIER 1

Slain, sir, doubtless.

SOLDIER 2

He is himself alone,
To answer all the city.











20.

TITUS

Thou art lost, Martius...
Titus has no time to mourn. He looks over the hopeless
situation. Scanning the rooftops, windows and shops.
Then he stops He sees something Past the burning bus
Through the smoke and flames...
He glimpses a ghostly figure...

TITUS

Who's yonder,

That does appear as he were flayed? 0 gods! He has the stamp of Martius. It is indeed Martius. A shocking sight.

Drenched head-to-toe in blood.
His face splattered with gore.
His eyes wild.
 
Lost in something like rapture.

MARTIUS

Come I too late?! Come I too late?!

TITUS

Ay, if you come not in the blood of
others,
But mantled in your own.

Martius laughs wildly and embraces Titus, who comes away splattered with blood:

MARTIUS

0, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I wooed, in

HEART

As merry as when our nuptial day was done!

SUDDENLY -- a deafening explosion -- and RPG EXPLODING from nearby. Then gunfire. Bullets shatter windows. The Volscians are attacking again.

The Romans instantly begin diving for cover and taking up

DEFENSIVE POSITIONS--











21.
Martius scans the location. Sees the attack is coming from
an

old Hilton hotel. Now pockmarked with bullets and artillery shells. Most of the windows shattered.

This is the Volscian stronghold. The last stand. He sees flashes of Volscian soldiers moving on the roof and balconies, and snipers firing from windows.

There is an open plaza, littered with bodies and debris, in front of the hotel.
Martius stops scanning with his binoculars--
Sees Aufidius moving in the hotel, directing the battle--

MARTIUS
There is the man of my soul's hate--

AUFIDIUS--

Piercing our Romans.
 

TITUS

Worthy sir, thou bleeds.
Thy exercise hath been too violent
For a second course of fight.

MARTIUS

Sir, praise me not.
My work hath yet not warmed me.
The blood I drop is more medicinal
Than dangerous to me. To Aufidius thus
I will appear and fight.

He turns to some soldiers, imploring them to join him. His bloody visage and intensity are strangely inspiring, his

FEROCITY INFECTIOUS:

MARTIUS

(TO SOLDIERS)

If any such be here-
As it were sin to doubt - that love this

PAINTING

Wherein you see me smeared; if any fear Lesser his person than an ill report; If any think brave death outweighs bad life,

And that his country's dearer than

HIMSELF;

Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,

AND FOLLOW MARTIUS!
The soldiers are pumped up -- like Marines straining for

COMBAT--











22.

MARTIUS

0, ME ALONE! MAKE YOU A SWORD OF ME!
 

THEY BOLT--

Zigzagging across the plaza toward the hotel--
Titus and the others provide covering fire--

EXT. CORIOLES-PLAZA - DAY

Martius zigzags with his men across the dangerously exposed

PLAZA--

They return fire at the hotel as best they can, but the barrage from the Volscians is murderous--

Roman soldiers contort and fall, blood spraying-- Bullets snap and ricochet everywhere around them--

But still they keep up a steady pace, reloading and firing

as

THEY GO--

Then Martius is hit--

BLOOD SPRAYS--

But still he keeps on--
The front of the hotel is closer now--
Martius and his soldiers race to the hotel and crash into
the

LOBBY--

INT. CORIOLES-HOTEL-LOBBY - DAY

Martius and his soldiers battle the Volscian defenders in
the

HOTEL LOBBY--

It is the weird and incongruous nature of modern urban
warfare: soldiers fighting to the death among hotel couches
and tatty corporate artwork--
It is brutal--

Martius and his soldiers cut a bloody swath across the hotel

LOBBY--

Another HUGE EXPLOSION rocks the hotel -- like a seismic blast -- an ugly 1970's chandelier falls--
 
23.

Martius and his men move into a stairwell--

INT. CORIOLES-HOTEL-STAIRWELL - DAY

Martius and his men race up the stairway-Volscians are firing down at them--

Bullets ricochet crazily in the confined stairway, refracting
from concrete walls and twisting metal railing, sending up
sparks and clouds of dust--
Then Martius slows to a stop.
Looks up.

Aufidius is on the stairway above. Glaring down at him. A long beat as they lock eyes. Both panting for breath in

the
heat of the combat.

MARTIUS

I'll fight with none but thee, for I do hate thee.

AUFIDIUS
We hate alike.
Then Martius does something astounding.
He holds out his arms to his sides and drops his weapons.
They clatter down.
Aufidius does the same.
The Roman and Volscian soldiers watch.
None daring to interfere.

Martius and Aufidius continue to glare at each other --
dropping weapons -- disarming -- Martius climbing up the
stairs, Aufidius coming down -- moving closer and closer--
At an instant-
They slam together-
Fighting without weapons--

Grappling brutally. Tearing at each other. Twining together.
Fingers grasping. Teeth snapping. Hands pulling.
It is a bloody, terrible, graceless struggle.











24.

They crash and slam awkwardly in the claustrophobic stairwell. Smashing into the walls. Falling from level to
 
LEVEL--

THEN--

Another EXPLOSION rocks the hotel--
Part of the roof COLLAPSES--
Concrete SLAMS down--

A cloud of smoke, dust and debris obscures everything-Martius is tossed violently to the ground in the action-- Aufidius is pulled away by several of his men. They drag him to safety. Roman soldiers fire after them. The sound is deafening in the confined garage.

But Aufidius and his comrades disappear into a cloud of
dust.
Gone.
Martius glares after him. Wipes blood from his eyes.

INT. CORIOLES-HOTEL-LOBBY - NIGHT

The hotel lobby has been turned into a hastily assembled emergency triage station.

The moaning and screaming of the injured are constant. Roman medics attend to the wounded: administering IVs; arranging evacuations; performing battlefield surgery.
Martius sits, dried blood covering his face, looking over

his

injured and dying soldiers as a medic stitches up a wound in his arm. Titus is with him.

General Cominius enters with several attending officers, going to congratulate Martius.

COMINIUS

If I should tell thee over this thy day's work,
Thou would not believe thy deeds.

Martius is barely listening. His attention is on a YOUNG SOLDIER across the room. The Young Soldier is injured, pale and thirsty. Dying.

COMINIUS

But I'll report it
Where Senators shall mingle tears with

(MORE)
 
25.

COMINIUS (CONT'D)

SMILES;

Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
In the end admire and say: "We thank the

GODS
Our Rome hath such a soldier."

MARTIUS

(SHIFTING PAINFULLY)

Pray now, no more. My mother,

When she does praise me, grieves me. I have done as you have done - that's what I can;

Induced as you have been - that's for my country.
Martius continues to look at the poor dying soldier.

TITUS

Rome must know
The value of her own. It were a

CONCEALMENT

Worse than a theft,
To hide your doings.

MARTIUS

I have some wounds upon me, and they

SMART
To hear themselves remembered.

The surgeon finishes stitching Martius' arm. Starts to clean another wound.

COMINIUS

Should they not,
Well might they fester against

INGRATITUDE

Too modest are you.

Impatient, Martius rises, painfully and slowly. He takes his canteen and crosses to the Young Soldier. Gives his canteen to the boy. The Young Soldier drinks. His deep, sad eyes
gaze

up at Martius.
Martius watches as...
The Young Soldier dies. The light goes from his eyes. His
 

head hangs awkwardly. His boyish face is leaden. Martius suddenly finds himself exhausted. Morally and physically spent.











26.

MARTIUS

(TO COMINIUS)

I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall

PERCEIVE

Whether I blush or no Howbeit,
thank you.
Martius stares at the dead soldier.

EXT. CORIOLES-STREET - NIGHT

Aufidius and some of his Volscian soldiers, bloody and filthy, are on foot.

They are moving through the outskirts of Corioles, leaving the city. Exhausted after the long and failed battle. Fires burn from blasted shops and homes. The Romans have clearly laid waste to this part of the city.

There is a minivan stopped ahead of them. Bullets holes everywhere. Bodies inside.

They walk to it. Aufidius looks in. A dead family. Father, mother, kids in the back. Bloody toys on the floor of the minivan.

Roman atrocities.
Aufidius gazes at the bodies. His face hardens.
He whispers to himself:

AUFIDIUS

Five times, Martius,

I have fought with thee; so often hast thou beat me,
And would do so, I think, should we

ENCOUNTER

As often as we eat.

He becomes aware some of his men are looking at him, disturbed at his fervor.
 

AUFIDIUS

FOR WHERE

I thought to crush him in an equal force, True sword to sword, I'll stab him some way,

Or wrath -- or craft -- may get him.











27.

SOLDIER

He's the devil.

AUFIDIUS
Bolder, though not so subtle.
A beat. Aufidius continues with prayer-like intensity:

AUFIDIUS

My valor, poisoned with him,
Shall fly out of itself ...
Nor sleep, nor sanctuary, being naked,

Sick, the prayers of priests,
Nor times of sacrifice,

Shall lift up their rotten privilege And custom,
Against my hate to Martius.

In the shattered glass of the minivan window, Aufidius suddenly sees himself.
He studies his own face, nurturing his dark thoughts.

AUFIDIUS

Where I find him, were it

At home, upon my brother's guard, even there,

Will I wash my fierce hand in his heart.

INT. POLITICO BAR - DAY

Back in Rome, we are at a comfortable restaurant/bar near
the

Senate where politicians gather to eat, drink, gossip and conspire. The business of state is conducted over steak and martinis.
 
Comfortable red leather booths. Wooden panelling.

Two Tribunes -- Senators chosen to speak for the people -- are having lunch.
BRUTUS is a large man in a rumpled grey suit; a sweating
bear

with a taste for bare-knuckle politics. SICINIUS is smaller and vulpine; crafty and cold.

Both are ambitious politicos used to manipulating the people and the press for their personal ends. With them sits Cassius, the political agitator we met before.

The TV over the bar shows images of Martius' victory: parading Roman troops; Volscian prisoners; flags; adoring crowds; triumphant slogans; "Mission Accomplished."











28.

SICINIUS

Was ever man so proud as is this Martius?

CASSIUS

He has no equal.

SICINIUS

When we were chosen Tribunes for the

PEOPLE-

BRUTUS

Marked you his lip and eyes?

SICINIUS

Nay, but his taunts.

They see Senator Menenius approaching. Sicinius nods to Cassius, who quickly goes.

Menenius stops by on his way out. He is jolly, knowing the victory will assure his protege's political future:

MENENIUS

The augurer tells me we shall have news tonight.

BRUTUS

Good or bad?
 
MENENIUS

Not according to the prayer of the
people, for they love not Martius.

SICINIUS

Nature teaches beasts to know their
friends.

MENENIUS

You blame Martius for being proud?

BRUTUS

We do it not alone, sir.

Subtly, the polite chit-chat is turning more serious and pointed; Menenius growing sharper. The gloves are coming

off.

MENENIUS

I know you can do very little alone

You talk of pride: 0 that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! 0 that you could!











29.

BRUTUS
What then, sir?

MENENIUS

Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting, proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in Rome.
The saturnine Sicinius' response seems almost a threat:

SICINIUS

Menenius, you are known well enough too.

MENENIUS

I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying water in it; one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the
 

morning. What I think I utter, and spend my malice in my breath.

BRUTUS
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.

MENENIUS

You know neither me, yourselves nor
anything You are ambitious.
A tense beat. They are formidable adversaries.

MENENIUS

Good-e'en to your worships. More of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians I will be bold to take my leave of you.

He goes. The Tribunes watch him cut through the lunch crowd and exit.
