63.

INT. VILLA -- LIVING ROOM - DAY

Volumnia watches the proceedings closely on TV. She is pleased with her son's performance so far.

INT. TELEVISION STUDIO - DAY

Menenius, ever the People's Friend, steps to the microphone:

MENENIUS

Lo, citizens, he says he is content.
The warlike service he has done,

CONSIDER; THINK

Upon the wounds his body bears, which

SHOW

Like graves in the holy churchyard.

CORIOLANUS
(uncomfortable with this)
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.

INT. APARTMENT - DAY

Aufidius sits with several of his officers, leaning forward, watching the drama unfold on TV.

INT. TELEVISION STUDIO - DAY


MENENIUS

Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier. Do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier.
Coriolanus cuts in, his impatience getting the better of

him:

CORIOLANUS

What is the matter

That being passed for Consul with full voice,

I am so dishonored that the very hour You take it off again?

SICINIUS
 
We charge you that you have contrived to

TAKE

From Rome all seasoned office, and to

WIND

Yourself into a power tyrannical

(MORE)











64.

SICINIUS (CONT'D)

(the coup de grace)
For which you are a traitor to the
people.
Coriolanus responds, a cobra striking:

CORIOLANUS

How? Traitor?!

MENENIUS

(ALARMED)

Nay, temperately! Your promise.

CORIOLANUS

The fires in the lowest hell fold in the people!

Call me their traitor, thou injurious Tribune!

SICINIUS

(CALLING)

Mark you this, people?!

The crowd responds, egged on by Cassius and Tamora. A murmur of voices, a chant growing, "Traitor traitor traitor..."

Brutus cleverly plays the reasonable voice, knowing his
words
will further rile Coriolanus:

BRUTUS
 
But since he hath

Served well for Rome--

CORIOLANUS

(SNAPS)

What do you prate of service?

BRUTUS

I talk of that, that know it.

CORIOLANUS

You?!
I'll know no further.
Let them pronounce death, exile,

Flaying, pent to linger

But with a grain a day - I would not buy Their mercy at the price of one fair word!











65.

INT. VILLA -- LIVING ROOM - DAY

Volumnia watches, alarmed now. She knows this rage will
prove
to be disastrous for her son.

INT. TELEVISION STUDIO - DAY

Sicinius seizes the moment to destroy Coriolanus, barking into the microphone:

SICINIUS

In the name of the people

And in the power of us the Tribunes, we, Even from this instant, banish him our city!

In the people's name,
I say IT SHALL BE SO!
Well-rehearsed by Cassius and Tamora, many in the crowd
respond with a fierce cry:

CROWD
 

It shall be so! It shall be so! Let him away!

TAMORA
He's banished! IT SHALL BE SO!

CROWD

It shall be so! It shall be so! It shall be so...!

Cassius and Tamora keep the crowd at a fever pitch-- They keep chanting and railing--

A	building seismic rumble--

COMINIUS

(STEPPING FORWARD)
Hear me, my masters, and my common
friends--!

SICINIUS

He's sentenced. No more hearing.

COMINIUS
Let me speak!
The crowd's fury is building--
It is all about to erupt--











66.

BRUTUS

There's no more to be said, but he is

BANISHED

As enemy to the people and his country.

IT SHALL BE SO!

CROWD

It shall be so! It shall be so! It shall be so...!

AND THEN--

CORIOLANUS EXPLODES--
 
His rage is volcanic--

He SLAMS the standing microphone away--
His dragon's ROAR silences the entire studio--

CORIOLANUS

YOU COMMON CRY OF CURS!

A	collective intake of breath-- The crowd is stunned--

CORIOLANUS

Whose breath I hate
As reek of the rotten fens, whose loves I

PRIZE

As the dead carcasses of unburied men That do corrupt my air... (each word an attack)

I BANISH YOU!

The crowd is silent. No one dares to even breathe.
AT THE VILLA: Volumnia watches, frozen, breathless.
IN THE APARTMENT: Aufidius stands, riveted.

BACK IN THE STUDIO:

CORIOLANUS

Here remain with your uncertainty.

Let every feeble rumor shake your hearts! Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,

Fan you into despair! Have the power

STILL

To banish your defenders, till at length Your ignorance - which finds not till it feels,

(MORE)











67.

CORIOLANUS (CANT'D)

Making but reservation of yourselves;
 
Still your own foes - deliver you

As most abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows!
A beat.
The TV cameras hum. The crowd is silent.
Menenius and the others watch in amazement.

Coriolanus slowly takes one last, long look at the people of Rome.

THEN:

CORIOLANUS

Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back.

He turns and slowly walks toward one of the tunnels leading from the studio.
The crowd follows every step with their eyes.

He stops.
Turns back.
Steel.

CORIOLANUS

There is a world elsewhere.
And he goes down the tunnel.
Disappearing from view.
A silent beat.
Then, a chilling cry of absolutely Jacobin bloodlust from
the

STANDS:

TAMORA

The people's enemy is gone!
The crowd SCREAMS their approval.
The SAVAGE CRY echoes around the studio.
The echoing roar takes us to...











68.

EXT. WASTELAND CHECKPOINT - DAWN

The outskirts of Rome are an urban wasteland. Abandoned factories. Rusting cars. Overgrown vacant lots. Collapsing advertising billboards.
 

There is a lonely gas station in the distance, its neon sign glowing a lurid green in the gray dawn light.

We are at a Roman checkpoint on the highway into the city. A guardhouse and barrier. Some barbed wire barricades. Bored soldiers.

Several cars pull up to the checkpoint. Two Roman security SUVs. Menenius' familiar limousine. And Volumnia's enormous Bentley.

Security Guards climb out of their vehicle, light cigarettes and chat with the soldiers manning the checkpoint. Menenius, Titus and Cominius climb from Menenius' limousine.

INT. VOLUMNIA'S BENTLEY - DAWN

Meanwhile, inside the Bentley, Coriolanus is comforting his wife and mother:

CORIOLANUS

(TO VIRGILIA)

Come, leave your tears. A brief farewell.

THE BEAST
With many heads butts me away.

VIRGILIA

0 HEAVENS 0 HEAVENS

Volumnia has tears in her eyes as well. Coriolanus is surprisingly unsentimental and tough with her:

CORIOLANUS

Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage?

VOLUMNIA

Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
And occupations perish!

CORIOLANUS

Nay, mother, I shall be loved when I am lacked.

She nods to him, she has regained her composure.
 

69.

Only then do they climb from the car.

EXT. WASTELAND CHECKPOINT - DAWN

Coriolanus takes his leave:

CORIOLANUS

(EMBRACING TITUS)

Bid me farewell.

TITUS

Farewell, Martius.

CORIOLANUS

(EMBRACING COMINIUS)

Cominius, droop not, adieu.
I'll do well yet.
He goes to Menenius, who is genuinely distraught. For all
his
political machinations, he truly cares for Coriolanus.
Coriolanus is moved to see Menenius so emotional.

CORIOLANUS

Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger
man's,

And venomous to thine eyes.

MENENIUS

(DEEPLY)
If I could shake off but seven years
I'd go with thee every foot.
They embrace.

Then Coriolanus knows it is time to go. He picks up a traveling bag and slings it over his shoulder. Looks back at his friends and family.
A beat.

A certain darkness creeps into his expression. An ominous resolve.

CORIOLANUS

You shall hear from me still.
He turns and looks to the distance.
Miles and miles of wasteland and desolation.
 







70.

His future.

CORIOLANUS
I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon.
He strides off.

The soldiers manning the checkpoint raise the barrier. Coriolanus walks under it. And begins walking down the long highway away from Rome.
The only sound is the cold, lonely moan of the wind.
We fade to...

EXT./INT. EXILE SEQUENCE - DAY/NIGHT

Coriolanus' exile.

We see his long odyssey. It is a grueling physical journey -
-
and also something of a spiritual challenge. He is solitary
and without comfort: vulnerable to the elements and also to
the demons of his own psyche.
We see him as...

He walks along the barren highway. Trash piled along the road. A car zooms past. Whoosh. He is lost in dust...

Blazing heat, like a furnace, as he trudges over desert terrain. Burning oil wells blacken the sky in the

distance...

Isolated, within himself, as he walks past the detritus of war a burned out tank a mountain of rusted artillery shells skeletons bleached in the sun...

His clothes are dusty and dirty now. A sandstorm. He wraps a scarf around his head, like a burnoose. Only his eyes
visible
now...

A gypsy boy in tattered clothing riding a white horse passes him. The boy looks at him intently as he passes...

We get a sense of him moving into different terrain, up into a mountain range, climbing...

Then descending. Pouring rain. Lightning sparking. He is almost a Romantic figure now. Byronic. Wrapped in a cloak against the wildness of nature; the chiaroscuro flashes of light illuminating his haunted eyes...
 






71.

We end at...

EXT. OUTSIDE ANTIUM - NIGHT

Coriolanus stands. Like a statue. All his life in his
blazing
eyes. He is staring at a small town in the distance.
We see a sign: ANTIUM.

His destination since he began. The home of his nemesis, the hated Aufidius.
He begins to walk to the town.

INT. POLITICO BAR - DAY

Meanwhile, back in Rome, Brutus and Sicinius are having
lunch
at their usual hangout.

They see Volumnia entering the restaurant, pulling Virgilia after her. An ambush. She heads toward the Tribunes. Volumnia's eyes have the grim intensity of a predator. She looks strangely wild.

BRUTUS
Here comes his mother.

SICINIUS

(prepares to go)
Let's not meet her. They say she's mad.
Volumnia stalks up to them:

VOLUMNIA

0, you're well met. The hoarded plague of

THE GODS

Requite your love!
The Tribunes try to leave, she won't let them:

VOLUMNIA

Will you be gone?

VIRGILIA

You shall stay too. I would I had the

POWER

To say so to my husband.
 
SICINIUS

Are you mad?











72.

VOLUMNIA

Ay, fool, is that a shame? Note but this,

FOOL:

Hadst thou craft
To banish him that struck more blows for

ROME

Than thou hast spoken words?

SICINIUS

(trying to escape)
0 blessed heavens...
Volumnia is creating a scene. Heads are turning.

She continues her attack on Sicinius, but is distracted and

JUMBLED:

VOLUMNIA

More noble blows than ever thou wise words,
And for Rome's good. I'll tell thee what -

YET GO--

Nay -- but thou shalt stay too -- I would

MY SON

Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.

SICINIUS

What then?

VIRGILIA

What then?
He'd make an end of thy posterity.

VOLUMNIA

Bastards and all.
 

Menenius has entered the bar, seeing the trouble he goes to them, tries to calm Volumnia:

MENENIUS
Come, come, peace...

BRUTUS

Pray, let us go.

He tries to leave the bar. Volumnia stops him for final attack, something like a curse in its power:

VOLUMNIA

Now, pray, sir, get you gone.
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go,

HEAR THIS:

(GRABS VIRGILIA)

(MORE)











73.

VOLUMNIA (CONT'D)

This lady's husband here, this, do you see?!--

Whom you have banished, does exceed you all.

BRUTUS

Well, well, we'll leave you.

SICINIUS
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?

VOLUMNIA

I would the gods had nothing else to do But to confirm my curses!

Menenius gently restrains Volumnia and the Tribunes finally escape the bar.

Volumnia takes a breath, controls herself.

VOLUMNIA
 
Could I meet 'em

But once a day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy to it.

MENENIUS

You have told them home;

And, by my troth, you have cause. You'll sup with me?
She turns to him. A cold and killing fire in her eyes.

VOLUMNIA

Anger's my meat. I sup upon myself,
And so shall starve with feeding.
She takes Virgilia's hand and drags her out.
Menenius watches. Saddened.

Once proud Volumnia, reduced to this.

EXT. ANTIUM - NIGHT

Antium is an old Volscian city gone to seed. It is Latin in flavor, something like Havana.
There is life to the place, a certain humid vitality.
Someone

is singing in a bar. Old men are playing dominos on a patio. Flickering TV and radio babel from terraced apartment buildings.











74.

Coriolanus, his face still shrouded in the burnoose, like a Hamas soldier, moves through the streets.

He takes in the life of the town as he walks. Studying the faces of the Volscians around him.

Coriolanus sees a heavily-guarded apartment building at the end of the street. Jeeps and SOLDIERS.

Coriolanus approaches with stealth, moving in and out of shadows along the street, ducking into doorways and alleys, taking advantage of the darkness.

He stops. Steps into the shadows. For he sees...
Aufidius.
Walking with a few of his officers.
Aufidius is beloved in Antium. He has an easy manner with
the
people. He stops and chats. Laughs with them. He dances for
a
 
moment with a little girl.

Coriolanus watches from the shadows, his expression complex. There is real envy . Aufidius has such a comfortable way with the common people, he's natural, unaffected.

Aufidius jokes with the little girl's parents for a moment and then moves on.

Coriolanus watches Aufidius and his men go into an apartment building.

He scans the building with the eye of a Special Forces soldier. He sees that the soldiers guarding the building are bored, it is perfunctory work.

Two YOUNG WOMEN, perhaps hookers, move past the front of the building, flirting with the soldiers. The soldiers call and whistle to them, delighted.

Coriolanus uses this distraction to slip into the shadows behind the soldiers and sneak into the building...

INT. APARTMENT BUILDING-CORRIDOR - NIGHT

Coriolanus moves again with stealth, heading toward what is clearly the center of the action: a noisy room on the second floor.

The doorway is guarded by two serious GUARDS. These are not the bored soldiers out front, these are grim and intense warriors.











75.
Coriolanus considers his course.
Decides. Takes a breath. Focuses.
He is like ice now.

HE MOVES--

A steady stride--
He walks right up to the Guards--

Before they can even respond--

He punches one HARD in the throat -- the Guard recoils, gasping for air--

Simultaneously, Coriolanus SLAMS his other hand violently over the entire face of the second Guard -- grabbing his

face

firmly and SHOVING him back into the door-- So hard that the door slams aside-- And Coriolanus shoves the Guard into--
 
INT. AUFIDIUS' CHAMBER - NIGHT

Aufidius is having dinner with some of his men, their wives and some children--
The soldiers bolt up, upsetting the table, smashing dishes
--
pulling guns -- alarmed--
As Coriolanus powers in, still holding the second Guard by

THE FACE--
He flings the Guard aside--
Aufidius and his men, all pointing weapons at Coriolanus,
are
stunned.
A long beat.

Coriolanus' face is still masked by the burnoose. Only his cold eyes are visible.

AUFIDIUS

Whence comes thou? What wouldst thou? Thy name?
Coriolanus does not respond.











76.

Aufidius is growing uneasy. His men are tense, ready to open fire at any second.

AUFIDIUS

Speak, man! What's thy name?

CORIOLANUS

A name unmusical to the Volscians' ears, And harsh in sound to thine.

The other Guard from outside, and several other soldiers, rush in. Weapons drawn, surrounding Coriolanus. He doesn't move a muscle.

Aufidius, intrigued by the stranger's courage, waves his men off.

AUFIDIUS
Say, what's thy name?

Thou has a grim appearance .What's thy name?
 
CORIOLANUS

Know'st thou me yet?

AUFIDIUS
I know thee not Thy name?

Finally, Coriolanus removes his burnoose. His face is exposed. The Volscians are stunned.

CORIOLANUS

My name is Caius Martius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the

VOLSCES

Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness

MAY
My surname Coriolanus.

The Volscians look to Aufidius, very nervous, unsure how to proceed. Aufidius just stares back at Coriolanus, staggered.

CORIOLANUS

Only that name remains.
Aufidius doesn't understand. Coriolanus explains:

CORIOLANUS

The cruelty and envy of the people, Who have all forsook me, hath devoured the rest,

And suffered me by the voice of slaves to

BE

(MORE)











77.

CORIOLANUS (CANT'D)

Whooped out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth, not out of

HOPE -

Mistake me not - to save my life; for if
I had feared death, of all the men in the
 
WORLD

I would have avoided thee, but in mere spite,

To be full quit of those my banishers, Stand I before thee here.

Coriolanus dares to take a step toward Aufidius--

The Volscians react. Guns are raised, fingers tight on triggers, an instant from opening fire--
Coriolanus carefully holds out his arms. He's unarmed.
Aufidius nods to his men. They hold their fire.

Coriolanus slowly crosses the room toward Aufidius. Step by step. Their eyes are locked. Nothing else in the world exists.

CORIOLANUS

I will fight
Against my cankered country with the

SPLEEN

Of all the under fiends. But if thou Dares not this, then I present

My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice...
Coriolanus stops right in front of Aufidius and slowly,
carefully, undoes his collar. Exposing his naked throat.
Bending back his head.
Ready for execution.

CORIOLANUS

Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,

Since I have ever followed thee with hate,

And cannot live but to thy shame unless It be to do thee service. A long beat.

Aufidius stares at Coriolanus.
The Volscians watch, eyes wide, too tense to do anything
now.











78.

Aufidius just continues to stare at Coriolanus.
Eyes locked.
Coriolanus blinks some sweat from his eyes. This tiny, human
 
response sparks something in Aufidius.

AUFIDIUS

O Martius Martius

Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy.
He offers his hand.

Coriolanus takes it. Aufidius continues to hold him by the hand, rather intensely, speaking low:

AUFIDIUS

Let me twine
Mine arms about that body.
He embraces Coriolanus.

Aufidius' men finally relax. Weapons are lowered. Relieved glances exchanged.

Some of the Volscians, though, are clearly suspicious of Coriolanus. They watch Aufidius and Coriolanus, concerned. Aufidius still can't quite believe his ancient enemy is now his newest ally.

AUFIDIUS

KNOW THOU

I loved the maid I married; never man Sighed truer breath. But that I see thee here,

Thou noble thing, more dances my rapt

HEART

Than when I first my wedded mistress saw Bestride my threshold.

Coriolanus glances to him, perhaps a little disturbed or embarrassed by the intensity of Aufidius' words. Aufidius steps away from him, gestures for Coriolanus to

sit.

AUFIDIUS

Why, thou Mars, I tell thee,
We have a power on foot, and I had

PURPOSE

Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,

(MORE)
 




79.

AUFIDIUS (CONT'D)

Or lose mine arm for it. Thou hast beat

ME OUT
Twelve several times, and I have nightly

SINCE

Dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me.

Aufidius continues quietly, almost whispering:

AUFIDIUS

Worthy Martius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banished, we would muster

ALL
From twelve to seventy, and, pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood, overbear it.

INT. SHOWER ROOM - NIGHT

Coriolanus sits, naked. He has finally washed off the layers of dirt from his journey.
An old woman is using an electric razor to shave his head.
Aufidius is standing in the doorway to the room. Watching.

His eyes move over Coriolanus' body, adding up the scars and
wounds.
A pause.

Then Aufidius goes to the old woman. Takes the razor from her. She goes.

Aufidius continues to shave Coriolanus' head himself. It is a deeply personal act, even intimate Yet Aufidius employs the same methodical rhythms as when he was
sharpening

his knife at the opening of the story.

INT. APARTMENT BUILDING-WAR ROOM - NIGHT

The Volscian military command center. Maps, recon photos and radio equipment. Stacks of grenade launchers and arms. Aufidius' CAPTAINS and AIDES wait alongside some bedraggled Volsce POLITICIANS in ill-fitting suits. Aufidius ushers Coriolanus in:
 









80.

AUFIDIUS

0, come, go in,

And take our friendly senators by the hands.
Coriolanus shakes hands with the politicians:

CORIOLANUS

You bless me, gods.

Then Aufidius takes him to a huge military map laid out on a pool table. Rome and her territories. Strategic markers denote Roman forces and Volscian forces.

AUFIDIUS

Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou

WILT HAVE

The leading of thine own revenges, take The one half of my commission.

The Volscian soldiers and politicos are shocked. Aufidius is giving Coriolanus command of half his forces!

AUFIDIUS

And set down---
As best thou art experienced, since thou

KNOWS

Thy country's strength and weakness---
thine own ways,

Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,

Or rudely visit them in parts remote, To fright them ere destroy.

Aufidius looks at Coriolanus hard. There it is. The gauntlet is thrown down. Coriolanus will have to completely betray Rome: expose her military weaknesses, tell her secrets.

For all his neurotic intensity, Aufidius is a shrewd man. Coriolanus nods and turns to the battle map, moving various markers around to show Rome's defensive positions. Aufidius watches him with Machiavellian calm.

INT. POLITICO BAR - DAY
 
Several weeks later, back in Rome, politics go on as usual.

Menenius is passing the Tribunes' table. They josh with him:

BRUTUS
Is this Menenius?











81

SICINIUS

'Tis he,'tis he! 0, he is grown most kind of late. Hail sir!

MENENIUS

Hail to you both.

SICINIUS

YOUR CORIOLANUS

Is not much missed, but with his friends.

MENENIUS
All's well, and might have been much

BETTER IF

He could have temporized.

SICINIUS
Where is he, hear you?

MENENIUS

Nay, I hear nothing. His mother and his

WIFE
Hear nothing from him.

BRUTUS

Caius Martius was
A worthy officer in the war, but
insolent,

Overcome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,

SELF-LOVING--
 
MENENIUS

I think not so.

SICINIUS
And Rome sits safe and still without him.

They are distracted when people begin talking loudly, alarmed, at the bar. They hush each other and watch the TV over the bar. Something has happened.

On the TV: a SPECIAL REPORT. Breaking News. A scroll across the bottom of the screen reads "The Volscians On The March?"

TV ANCHORMAN

(ON TV)

Reports the Volsces with two several

POWERS

Are entered in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before them...











82.

The whole bar is growing quiet now. All watching the TV, which shows grainy indistinct images -- like cell phone pictures -- of troops and tanks.

MENENIUS
'Tis Aufidius,

Who, hearing of our Martius' banishment, Thrusts forth his horns again into the world.

SICINIUS

(NERVOUS)

Come, what talk you of Martius?

BRUTUS

It cannot be the Volsces dare break with us.

TV ANCHORMAN

(ON TV)
 

The nobles in great earnestness are going All to the Senate House. Some news is

COMING
That turns their countenances...
(he listens to his ear
piece for a second)

Yes, the first report is seconded, and more,
More fearful, is delivered.

The TV picture switches to a flustered TV REPORTER outside the Senate. A lot of nervous activity behind him.

TV REPORTER

(ON TV)

It is spoke freely out of many mouths - How probable I do not know - that Martius Has ioined with Aufidius--

There is an audible gasp in the bar -- quickly silenced and hushed so all can hear the TV:

TV REPORTER

(ON TV)

--He leads a power against Rome,

And vows revenge as spacious as between The youngest and oldest thing.
Something close to terror on the faces of the politicos.
Menenius, without a word, goes.

He does not want to believe this is possible.











83.

INT. VILLA -- BEDROOM - NIGHT

Virgilia lies on her bed.

On the TV an imbedded WAR CORRESPONDENT is giving an update, intercut with shaky and unclear images of the Volscian army on the move:

TV WAR CORRESPONDENT

(ON TV)
 
A fearful army, led by Caius Martius

Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories, and have already
Overborne their way, consumed with fire,

AND TOOK

What lay before them.

INT. VILLA -- LIVING ROOM - NIGHT

Volumnia sits, almost frozen, smoking, watching the TV. Her emotions are deep and dark.

Her son, to her the model of all Roman virtues, has betrayed his country.

TV WAR CORRESPONDENT

(ON TV)

Martius has joined with the Volscians -
He is their god. He leads them like
Boys pursuing summer butterflies
Or butchers killing flies.
Close up on Volumnia's face.
She gives away practically nothing.
She takes a slow drag on her cigarette.

EXT. VOLSCIAN CAMP - DAY

Urban industrial wasteland. Old factories and abandoned warehouses. Broken asphalt. Smashed windows.

The Volscians have set up camp here. On the decaying fringes of the city. We see military hardware. Guns. Missile launchers. Armored vehicles.

Soldiers are cleaning weapons, cooking meals, sleeping,
playing video games.
Then...











84.

An incongruous sight...

An old barber chair floats past. Moving across the blue sky.

Carried overhead by a group of Volscian soldiers. But there is something different about these Volscian soldiers. They have altered their uniforms into something pagan and primitive. All have shaved heads. Many have face
 
tattoos or wear striking war paint.

It is like something from LORD OF THE FLIES.

They set the barber chair down outside an abandoned factory.
This shattered and abandoned factory is Coriolanus' domain.
It is decorated with human skulls.

The CAMP BARBER, a fat man in a greasy butcher's apron, begins to strop his razor.

Hard core young soldiers line up to have their heads shaved.
They are Coriolanus' ACOLYTES.
There is no sign of Coriolanus himself.

Aufidius and his LIEUTENANT stand on the fringes, disturbed by the strange cult of personality that has grown up around Coriolanus.

AUFIDIUS

Do they still fly to Coriolanus?

LIEUTENANT

I do not know what witchcraft's in him,

BUT

Your soldiers use him as the grace before meat,

Their talk at table, and their thanks at end.
And you are darkened in this action, sir.

AUFIDIUS

He bears himself more proud,
Even to my person, than I thought he

WOULD

When first I did embrace him.
They turn and walk to the building where Aufidius is

QUARTERED:

LIEUTENANT

Sir, I beseech you, think you he'll carry
Rome?











85.

AUFIDIUS
 

(GRIM)

I think he'll be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes

IT

By sovereignty of nature.

Aufidius nods to the guards outside his quarters and enters with his Lieutenant...

INT. VOLSCIAN CAMP-AUFIDIUS' QUARTERS - DAY

A shattered building. Old graffiti on the walls. Weapons.
Maps. Aufidius' gear.
Aufidius sits on his cot, deep in thought.

He pulls a folded bit of paper from his pocket. Carefully
and

lovingly unfolds it. He has been carrying this paper for months.

We realize it is the glossy magazine cover with the picture of Coriolanus that Aufidius tore out earlier.

He gazes at the picture, his fingers smoothing the paper, tracing the contours of Coriolanus' face...

AUFIDIUS

Whether t'was pride,
Whether defect of judgement,
Or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing,
Made him feared,

So hated, and so banished.
A beat as he studies the picture.

His lieutenant watches him closely, disturbed by Aufidius' obsession with Coriolanus.

AUFIDIUS

So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time.
He brings the picture closer, whispering now:

AUFIDIUS
One fire drives out one fire; one nail,

ONE NAIL;

Rights by rights founder, strengths by strengths do fail
And when, Caius, Rome is thine,

(MORE)
 







86.

AUFIDIUS (CONT'D)

Thou art poorest of all -- then shortly art thou mine.

INT. ROMAN WAR ROOM - DAY

Rome is at war now, so the room is busy and tense. Maps and video footage chart the enemy's progress. Soldiers confer urgently outside the door.

Menenius stands with the two Tribunes, Brutus and Sicinius.
With them are several SENATORS and GENERALS.
Menenius snaps angrily:

MENENIUS

No, I'll not go!

SICINIUS

(IMPLORING)

GOOD MENENIUS--

MENENIUS

Go, you that banished him!
A mile before his tent fall down, and

KNEE
The way into his mercy.
They stop when Titus enters with General Cominius.
Titus is dusty, has just come from somewhere. He is pale.
Truly shaken.

Menenius and the others crowd around him, waiting for his report.
Titus sits, takes a moment to pull himself together, and

then
reports with the grim severity of a death sentence:

TITUS

He would not seem to know me.
A beat.

TITUS

I urged our old acquaintance, and the
 
DROPS

That we have bled together. "Coriolanus" He would not answer to, forbade all names...
A long beat. They wait for him to go on.

Titus searches for the words to continue.











87.

TITUS

He was a kind of nothing.
(a difficult beat)
Titleless...
Till he had forged himself a name in the

FIRE

Of burning Rome.
He has no more to say, his head drops.

Menenius begins to leave the room. The Tribunes stop him, leading him to a secluded corner:

SICINIUS

If you refuse your aid

IN THIS--

BRUTUS

IF YOU

Would be your country's pleader, your good tongue,

More than the instant army we can make, Might stop our countryman.

MENENIUS

No, I'll not meddle.

SICINIUS

Pray you, go to him.

MENENIUS

What should I do?
Brutus stops him, with real emotion:
 
BRUTUS

Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome towards Martius.

MENENIUS

Well, and say that Martius
Return me, as Titus is returned,
Unheard - what then?

SICINIUS
Yet your good will
Must have that thanks from Rome.
Menenius thinks about it.

BRUTUS

You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.











88.

Menenius, despite all still a patriot at heart, decides.

MENENIUS

I'll undertake it
I think he'll hear me.
The Tribunes are relieved. Cominius nods and escorts
Menenius
out.
Brutus and Sicinius return to Titus.

TITUS

He'll never hear him.

SICINIUS
No?

TITUS

I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as it would burn Rome.

EXT. CHECKPOINT-HIGHWAY - DAY

The Roman checkpoint on the desolate highway. A formidable military presence here now: soldiers, heavy weapons, tanks. Volscian troops and a jeep can be seen down the highway.
 
We see Menenius' limousine pull up.

He and General Cominius climb out. Menenius is out of place in his trim business suit: a politician among soldiers. Menenius steels himself then passes through the Roman checkpoint.

He walks down the highway toward the distant Volscian
troops.

EXT. VOLSCIAN CAMP - DAY

Menenius is blindfolded, roughly pulled by two Volscian soldiers.
We hear some of the soldiers hooting at him. We stay close
on

Menenius' blindfolded face, sharing his feeling of disorientation and suspense.
The Volscians drag him into the abandoned factory--











89.

INT. ABANDONED FACTORY - DAY

Finally his guards stop him and pull off his blindfold--

REVEALING-

Coriolanus. Transformed.
And terrifying.

He is no longer Roman. He is not Volscian. He is, as Titus said, "a kind of nothing."

He sits in the barber chair. His head is completely shaved. His face is marked with martial face painting. These

striking
totemic markings also cover his scarred body.
He is primitive. Inhuman. Like a dragon.

The Angel of Death.

His young warrior Acolytes -- similarly shaved and painted -
-
are gathered around him; his personal bodyguard and cult.

A long beat as Menenius stares at his friend, stunned at the pagan metamorphosis.
Coriolanus just gazes back at him.

Menenius finally pulls himself together and approaches, with

FULSOME BRAVADO:
 

MENENIUS

The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old friend Menenius does! 0 Martius, Martius!

He steps forward to hug Coriolanus. Two of the Acolytes stop him. He can approach no further.

Menenius accepts this. No matter. He is completely confident he will be able to manipulate his protege. He always has in the past.

MENENIUS

Thou art preparing fire for us. Look
thee, here's water to quench it. I was

hardly moved to come to thee, but being
assured none but myself could move
thee, I have been blown out of your gates
with sighs, and conjure thee to pardon
Rome.











90.

A long beat.
Menenius waits for an answer. Grows uneasy.
Then...

CORIOLANUS
Away.

MENENIUS

How? . Away?

CORIOLANUS

(ICE)

Wife mother child I know not.

MY AFFAIRS

Are servanted to others.
Menenius can't believe this cold response--

MENENIUS

SIR--
 

CORIOLANUS

Therefore be gone.
His frigid eyes slice into Menenius:

CORIOLANUS

Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak.
Menenius stares at him, shaken to the core.
The Guards pull Menenius away.
Coriolanus doesn't even glance at him.

EXT. CHECKPOINT-HIGHWAY - DAY

Back at the Roman checkpoint, Menenius strides toward his limousine. He has been deeply shaken by his interaction with the transformed Coriolanus.

General Cominius follows urgently, Menenius doesn't stop:

MENENIUS

This Martius is grown from man to dragon. He has wings; he's more than a creeping thing.
He stops at his limo.











91.

A beat.
He turns back to Cominius. We see the pain in Menenius'
eyes.

MENENIUS

There is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger.
He climbs into his limo. Shuts the door.

The limousine drives off, sending up a cloud of dust that swirls around Cominius.

INT. MENENIUS' LIMO - DAY

Menenius sits in the back of his limo as it speeds back to Rome.

The rejection by Coriolanus has wounded him. Also he is plagued by guilt. He helped create this monster. He pushed Coriolanus into politics. And now Coriolanus has lost his
 
soul, even his humanity, and Rome is to be put to the sword.

All his fault.
This preys on him.

EXT. TRAIN TRACKS - DAY

Menenius' limousine pulls over by an isolated set of
railroad

tracks. Weeds springing up. Battered advertising posters. An old chain link fence.
Menenius climbs out of the car and walks along the tracks.
Thinking.
He stops.
He sits on the railroad tracks.

Pulls out a little pocket knife and, in the Roman fashion, efficiently slits his wrists.
He stares out over the hideous landscape.

Blood begins to pool around his stylish shoes.
From afar we see him, sitting on the railroad tracks, alone
and forlorn in this surreal urban wasteland, like a Samuel
Beckett character.
He slumps over.











92.

Menenius is dead.

INT. ABANDONED FACTORY - SUNSET

The red glow of dusk is shining through the cracked and
dusty
windows.
Coriolanus, still in the barber chair, broods silently.
Aufidius sits nearby, watching him.
The visit from Menenius is troubling Coriolanus.

CORIOLANUS

My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords how

PLAINLY
I have borne this business.

Aufidius is curiously formal in his response, the estrangement he feels toward Coriolanus growing:
 
AUFIDIUS

Only their ends
You have respected; stopped your ears

AGAINST

The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such

FRIENDS

That thought them sure of you.

CORIOLANUS

This last old man,

Whom with a cracked heart I have sent to Rome,

Loved me above the measure of a father.

Shouts and whistles from outside the factory draw their attention.

EXT. VOLSCIAN CAMP - SUNSET

Volumnia, Virgilia and Young Martius stride past the
soldiers

and mountains of military hardware. Volumnia leads, pulling the others by the hand.

Some of the soldiers whistle. Some spit. Others laugh and make lascivious noises. Many just watch with grim dislike. Volumnia appears to be completely impervious to the whistles and cruel taunts. Her head is high, back straight, eagle eye forward. She was never more a Roman patrician.











93.

She is magnificent.

INT. ABANDONED FACTORY - SUNSET

Coriolanus stands as Volumnia, Virgilia and Young Martius
are
led into the factory.

He tries to register nothing, assuming a sort of glacial calm.

Volumnia and the others stop -- taking in Coriolanus' savage new demeanor and appearance -- taking in the Acolytes and pagan totems.
 

Volumnia just stands, peering sternly at her son. As if daring him not to crumble before her. He doesn't. Aufidius watches everything closely.

It is Virgilia, finally, who bravely approaches:

VIRGILIA

My lord and husband--
He stop her, almost a warning, with:

CORIOLANUS
These eyes are not the same I wore in
Rome.

VIRGILIA

The sorrow that delivers us thus changed

Makes you think so.

CORIOLANUS

Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny, but do not say
For that "Forgive our Romans."

She shows great courage. Stepping forward and kissing him deeply. A long kiss.

CORIOLANUS

0, a kiss Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge.

It is a perverse response. In his monomaniacal imagination, his wife's kiss is obsessively equated with his revenge on Rome.

He finally moves to Volumnia, simply can't resist her
orbital
pull.











94.

CORIOLANUS

You gods I prate,

And the most noble mother of the world Leave unsaluted. Sink, my knee, in the earth.

He kneels before her. It is done with a sense of duty and protocol, not affection.
 
VOLUMNIA

0, stand up blest.
He rises.

VOLUMNIA

Then with no softer cushion than the

FLINT

I kneel before thee.
She quickly and dramatically kneels before him. It is a
coup
de theatre and a masterpiece of manipulation.

CORIOLANUS

What is this?

Your knees to me? To your corrected son?

VOLUMNIA

Thou art my warrior;
I hope to frame thee.
She indicates Young Martius:

VOLUMNIA
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.

CORIOLANUS

(to his son)
The god of soldiers,

Inform thy thoughts with nobleness, that thou may prove
To shame invulnerable.
Volumnia pulls Young Martius down:

VOLUMNIA

Your knee, sir.
She pulls Virgilia down:

VOLUMNIA

Even he, your wife, and myself,
Are suitors to you.
 











95.
 

All three kneel before Coriolanus. A pitiable sight. But he has no pity.

He turns, sits in the barber chair.

CORIOLANUS

I beseech you, peace!
Or, if you'd ask, remember this:
Do not bid me dismiss my soldiers, or

CAPITULATE

Again with Rome's mechanics. Tell me not Wherein I seem unnatural. Desire not To ally my rages and revenges with

Your colder reasons.
Volumnia stands, assuming again a position of strength.

VOLUMNIA

0, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us
anything,

For we have nothing else to ask but that Which you deny already; yet we will ask, That, if you fail in our request, the

BLAME

May hang upon your hardness. Therefore hear us.

CORIOLANUS
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for

WE'LL

Hear naught from Rome in private.
(coldly, to her)
Your request?

VOLUMNIA

Should we be silent and not speak, our

RAIMENT

And state of bodies would reveal what

LIFE

We have led since thy exile. Think with

THYSELF

How more unfortunate than all living

WOMEN

Are we come hither, since that thy sight,

WHICH SHOULD
 

Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts,

Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow,

Making the mother, wife, and child to see The son, the husband and the father

TEARING

His country's bowels out.











96.

Coriolanus' face is a study in aloof neutrality. Yet he is listening intensely and Volumnia's words are affecting. She fights back emotion. It is impossible to tell if this real or feigned.

VOLUMNIA

For myself, son,
I propose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine. If I cannot

PERSUADE THEE

Rather to show a noble grace, thou shalt

NO SOONER

March to assault thy country than to
Tread on thy mother's womb
That brought thee to this world.

VIRGILIA

(STANDS)

Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep

YOUR NAME

Living to time.

Young Martius stands as well and approaches his father, challenging and warlike:

YOUNG MARTIUS

You shall not tread on me.
I'll run away till I am bigger, but then
I'll fight!
 

Coriolanus stares at him -- the intensity of the boy's aggression is disturbing. And familiar.

CORIOLANUS
I have sat too long.
He rises and turns as if to go--

VOLUMNIA

Nay, go not from us thus!

Her command stops him. She appeals, quickly getting to the point of her argument:

VOLUMNIA

If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy

The Volsces whom you serve, you might

CONDEMN US

As poisonous of your honor. No, our suit
Is that you reconcile them -- so the

VOLSCES

(MORE)











97.

VOLUMNIA (CONT'D)

May say "This mercy we have showed," the Romans,
"This we received," and each in either

SIDE
Give the all-hail to thee and cry, "Be

BLEST

For making up this peace!"
Coriolanus does not respond.
She softens...

VOLUMNIA

Speak to me, son...
Still he does not respond.
His emotions are roiling.
 
Still she is soft and vulnerable...

VOLUMNIA

Why dost not speak?

But softness is not a note she plays naturally. She knows
it.

Her natural aggressiveness comes out, anger and outrage gradually boiling to the surface:

VOLUMNIA

Thinks thou it honorable for a noble man Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you.

He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy.

Perhaps thy childishness will move him

MORE

Than can our reasons. There's no man in

THE WORLD

More bound to his mother, yet here he lets me prate
Like one in the stocks!
She is assaulting him now, on the attack:

VOLUMNIA

Thou hast never in thy life
Showed thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen,

Has clucked thee to the wars and safely

HOME

Loaded with honor. Say my request's
unjust,
And spurn me back; and the gods will

(MORE)











98.

VOLUMNIA (CONT'D)

plague thee,
That thou restrains from me the duty
 

WHICH

To a mother's part belongs!

Coriolanus can take no more, turns and begins to walk away-- Volumnia reacts like lightning -- grabbing Virgilia and

Young
Martius and dragging them to the dirt with her--

VOLUMNIA

Down! Let us shame him with our knees!
She claws at the dirt -- like Hecuba -- keening -- a
shocking
explosion of raw emotion -- almost an incantation:

VOLUMNIA

Down! An end! This is the last. So we will home to Rome,

And die among our neighbors. Nay, behold!
This boy, that cannot tell what he would

HAVE

But kneels and holds up hands for
fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more

STRENGTH

Than thou hast to deny it.
She remains kneeling, panting for air.

Coriolanus looks at her. His noble mother. Clawing in the dirt like an animal. Filthy. Despairing. Her face wet with tears.

She looks back up at him. She senses she has failed.
It's over.

VOLUMNIA
Come, let us go.

She rises slowly, her age showing. Her spirit broken. Or seeming so.

She stares at Coriolanus as she rips off the Roman Eagle medal she wears and flings it to the ground.

The blood red sky of sunset behind her reflects her passion as she summons up all her strength for a lacerating and icy

FAREWELL:

VOLUMNIA

This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
His wife is in Corioles and his child

(MORE)
 








99.

VOLUMNIA (CONT'D)
Like him by chance Yet give us our
dispatch.
I am hushed until our city be afire,
And then I'll speak a little.
She turns and begins to go.

But...
We see finally Coriolanus crack.
Like a great building crumbling.
Like fissures cutting across marble.
Emotion floods into him.
He lunges forward and grabs her hand. Volumnia stops.
Time stands still.
He doesn't speak.

THEN:

CORIOLANUS

O mother mother...
What have you done?
He falls to his knees, clutching her hand.

CORIOLANUS

Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down -- and this unnatural

SCENE

They laugh at.
He buries his head in her, like a lost child:

CORIOLANUS

O my mother, mother! 0!

You have won a happy victory for Rome; But for your son - believe it, 0 believe it! -

Most dangerously you have with him

PREVAILED

(he looks up at her

DEEPLY)

If not most mortal to him.

She looks down at him. His meaning, his foreshadowing, is
 

clear: she has saved Rome, but he knows he is doomed. Rome will live. He will die. This is the price for her victory today.











100.

She is willing to pay that price. So is he.
A moment between them.

He accepts his destiny.

CORIOLANUS

But let it come.

He stands, regains his composure. He slowly walks to Aufidius.
He leans close, speaking intimately:

CORIOLANUS

Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
I'll frame convenient peace. Now, good
Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have

HEARD

A mother less? Or granted less?
Aufidius?

AUFIDIUS

(CAREFULLY)

I was moved withal.

CORIOLANUS

I dare be sworn you were.

And, sir, it is no little thing to make Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,

What peace you'll make, advise me.
We study Aufidius' face. He gives away nothing.
Coriolanus turns back to Volumnia. Looks at her.
She is victorious.
The crimson sky looms over her ominously.
And we go to...

INT. FORMAL MINISTRY HALL - DAY
 
A solemn peace treaty signing ceremony.

Coriolanus represents the Volscians. Cominius represents the Romans. They sit side-by-side at desks signing the treaty. Volumnia and Virgilia, gorgeously dressed, are present. So too Brutus and Sicinius. The press films everything.











101

It has the stiff formality of a White House ceremony.
Cominius concludes signing:

COMINIUS

A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
We have all
Great cause to give great thanks.
He looks to Volumnia.

COMINIUS

Behold our patroness, the life of Rome.
She is erect and exalted. "The Life of Rome" personified.
She ignores her son.
Coriolanus will not look at her.

EXT. TRUCK STOP - DAY

A rundown Truck Stop in an industrial wasteland.

Garish, buzzing neon. Filthy 18-wheelers refueling. Music droning from a radio.

Aufidius, his Lieutenant and seven of his men are waiting outside the dusty diner.

The men with Aufidius are thugs and killers, the most brutal Volsces he could find. We note a couple of Coriolanus' Acolytes among them. They have turned with great venom on their hero.

They are like a mafia hit squad, waiting for Coriolanus to return with the peace treaty. Aufidius is deep in thought.

His Lieutenant breaks the silence:

LIEUTENANT
How is it with our general?

AUFIDIUS

As with a man by his own charity slain.
 

LIEUTENANT

Our soldiers will remain uncertain whilst 'Twixt you there's difference; but the

(MORE)











102.

LIEUTENANT (CANT'D)

fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.

AUFIDIUS

I know it,

And my pretext to strike at him admits A good construction.

A beat. He continues more to himself than them, almost convincing himself.

AUFIDIUS
I raised him, and I pawned

Mine honor for his truth; who being so heightened,

He watered his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends.

(BITTERLY)

At the last
I seemed his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance as if
I had been mercenary.

LIEUTENANT

So he did, my lord.

The army marveled at it; and in the last, When he had carried Rome and that we

LOOKED
For no less spoil than glory--

Aufidius works himself into an intense, neurotic rage:

AUFIDIUS
 
There was it!

For which my sinews shall be stretched upon him.
At a few drops of women's rheum, which

ARE

As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and

LABOR

Of our great action -- Therefore shall he die,

And I'll renew me in his fall.

LIEUTENANT

Therefore, at your vantage,

Ere he express himself or move the people With what he would say, let him feel your sword,

Which we will second.











103.

AUFIDIUS

(SEES SOMETHING)

Say no more.

In the distance they can see a Roman military truck approaching. Clouds of dust billow up.

They exchange a look. This is what they have been waiting for. They stand, stretch and prepare.

The truck stops across the highway from them and Coriolanus
gets out. He holds a copy of the peace treaty in a leather
portfolio. He is unarmed.
He stops.

He sees Aufidius and the thugs. Waiting for him. Like a
death
squad.
Coriolanus looks at them.
He knows exactly what's going to happen.
He is ready.
He nods and the truck drives off.
Coriolanus slowly crosses the highway to the truck stop,
like
a gunslinger walking down Main Street.
 

There is something new to Coriolanus here. A sort of acceptance. He knows his time is past.

Aufidius and the thugs go to meet him. The thugs spread out
a

bit, strategically, getting ready to strike. Coriolanus' experienced eyes miss none of this. They meet in the parking lot.

CORIOLANUS

(TO AUFIDIUS)

I am returned your soldier,
No more infected with my country's love
Than when I parted hence, but still

SUBSISTING
Under your great command.
He hands the treaty portfolio to Aufidius:

CORIOLANUS

We have made peace
With no less honor to the Volscians
Than shame to the Romans.











104.

AUFIDIUS
(handing the treaty to

LIEUTENANT)

Read it not,
But tell the traitor, in the highest

DEGREE

He hath abused your powers.

Coriolanus is ready for Aufidius' ploy. He is amused at the obvious attempt to anger him:

CORIOLANUS

Traitor? How now?

AUFIDIUS

Ay, traitor, Martius.
 
CORIOLANUS

"Martius"?

AUFIDIUS

Ay, Martius, Caius Martius! Dost thou

THINK

I'll grace thee with that robbery, thy

STOLEN NAME
"Coriolanus"?

He spins to the others, making the case against Coriolanus with cutting bitterness:

AUFIDIUS

PERFIDIOUSLY

He has betrayed your business and given up,

For certain drops of salt, your city Rome-I say "your city" - to his wife and

MOTHER;
Breaking his oath and resolution, like
A twist of rotten silk; never admitting
Counsel of the war, but at his nurse's

TEARS

He whined and roared away YOUR VICTORY!
Coriolanus tries to contain his anger:

CORIOLANUS

Hear'st thou, Mars?

AUFIDIUS
Name not the god, thou boy of tears.











105.

CORIOLANUS

Measureless liar, thou has made my heart Too great for what contains it. "Boy"? 0 slave.

Coriolanus' eyes miss nothing a Volscian thug shifting
 

a bead of sweat on another one secretly reaching into his coat for a weapon.

Some of the Volscian thugs are clearly nervous.

Coriolanus is ready. He prepares himself mentally to die. He is acutely controlled:

CORIOLANUS

Cut me to pieces, Volsces.
Men and lads, stain all your edges on me.
It is a dare. A challenge.

CORIOLANUS

"Boy"? False hound.
If you have writ your annals true, 'tis

THERE
That, like an eagle in a dovecote, I
Fluttered your Volscians in Corioles.
His gaze burns into Aufidius:

CORIOLANUS

Alone I did it "Boy."

AUFIDIUS

Let him die for it.
At this command, his men move--
Aufidius steps back as--
The Volscian thugs attack--
With knives, machetes and tire irons--

Coriolanus fights bravely -- disarming two, grabbing their weapons, killing them, fighting back--
Slashing and cutting his way through the killers-
Closer and closer to Aufidius, who just watches--
Blood spattering and spraying-
But the thugs overpower Coriolanus, there are just too many-
-











106.

They stab him -- slicing with knives -- battering with
chains

and clubs -- finally emptying pistols him into him-- It is graceless and brutal carnage. Slaughter.

But still he comes on. Body riddled with bullets and cut to
 
bits. He refuses to fall. Like something immortal. An

obscene
demon of blood.
Finally the thugs move away.

Coriolanus still stands. Teetering. His face is a swollen mask of blood and gore. Blood flows from his body, pooling around his feet, spreading across the parking lot. Aufidius steps forward.

What is left of Coriolanus glares at him through blood.
Aufidius slowly pulls his knife. The same knife he was

sharpening so carefully at the opening of the story. It has
finally found its purpose.
Coriolanus looks at him.

Then slowly Coriolanus tries to raise one bleeding arm this requires superhuman effort his slashed fingers clutch his shirt he rips it open exposing his breast. Ready.

He locks eyes with Aufidius.
Aufidius steps to him. Takes his neck. Pulls him onto the

knife. Driving it into him. Cradling his head like a lover.
They stand like this.
Then Coriolanus falls.
A pause.

AUFIDIUS

Take him up.
No one moves.

AUFIDIUS
Assist.
Abrupt cut to--











107.

EXT. TRUCK - DAY

Coriolanus' body is awkwardly tossed into the back of an
open
truck. Like a sack of potatoes.

EXT. TRUCK - SUNSET

A crowd of Volscians are gathered around the back of the truck. They have come to see Coriolanus' body.
 
We watch their faces. Normal people. A range of grim

emotion.
One raises a cell phone. Takes a photo.

More phone cameras come out. Streaming video. Recording the moment.

INT. VILLA -- LIVING ROOM - DAY

On the TV:
The footage from the cell phone video.
Coriolanus' body in the back of the trunk.

Volumnia stands.

Looking at her son.

His body sprawled ungainly in death.

No ritual or ceremony. No honor.

Her face.

Snap to black.

The End.
