By the chance, he passes a small nightclub, Cafe Sonata, and notices Nick Nightingale's name and photograph outside. He stops and looks at it.
The DOORMAN drifts over.
DOORMAN
The band's about to wind up but they're still serving.
BILL nods and goes in.
INT. CAFE SONATA - NIGHT
The place is about a quarter full.  BILL sits down at a table near the band. Nick sees him and winks.
BILL gestures hello, orders a beer.
The band finishes their last number and take a perfunctory bow to a scattering of applause. NICK comes over to the table.
NICK Hey, Bill!
They shake hands and ad-libs of greetings.
The WAITER swoops in with BILL's beer.
BILL What are you drinking?
NICK Scotch and soda.
The WAITER nods and hurries off.
NICK So what brings you out at this hour?
BILL
Just happened to be passing by.  I have a patient in the neighbourhood.
NICK Do you live in the Village?
BILL
No, we've got an apartment on Central Park West.
NICK You're married?
BILL Nine years.
NICK
That was the great looking woman you were dancing with at the party?
BILL Yes.
NICK Lucky man.
BILL nods.
NICK Any kids?
BILL
An eight year old daughter.  How about you?
NICK
I've got a wife and four boys in Seattle.
BILL That's great.  So is this your band?
NICK No, I'm just filling in.
BILL Who do you normally play with?
NICK
Anybody.  Anywhere.  As a matter of fact, I've got another gig later tonight.
BILL You're playing somewhere else tonight?
NICK
(shrugs)
They only get started there about two.
BILL In the village?
NICK
I don't actually know the address yet.
BILL How come?
NICK
It's in a different place every time, and I only get it about an hour or so beforehand.
BILL A different place every time?
NICK So far.
BILL
What's the big mystery?  Nick opens his palms in a parody of innocence.
 
I just play the piano.
BILL What kind of a function is it?
NICK What kind of a function is it?... 
Well, to be completely honest, it's not easy to describe.
BILL But you've worked there before?
NICK True.
BILL And it's not easy to describe?
NICK I play blindfolded.
BILL What?
NICK I play blindfolded.
Something near the entrance door attracts Nick's attention.
NICK
(stands up) Back in a minute.
He walks to the front window of the club and looks out into the snowy street.  He doesn't see what he's looking for and returns.
NICK
Sorry about that.  I'm supposed to meet somebody here.
BILL With the address?
Nick shrugs, meaning, yes.
BILL
Listen, you're putting me on about that blindfolded business, aren't you.
No, that's the truth.  They're very strict about that.
BILL
This is getting curiouser and curiouser.
NICK
Maybe so, but listen, I was sworn to secrecy, and please, just forget I said anything at all about it.
BILL
Nick, you can trust me.  I won't say a word about this to anyone but since you've told me this much, you can't stop now.
NICK
No, really, this is not a joke.  I'm not saying anything else.
BILL
Nick, you can't do this to me.  I'll wonder about this for the rest of my life.  Trust me.
NICK is very uncomfortable about this but is also dying to talk about it.
NICK Okay, well this is just between us.
BILL Absolutely.
NICK
Well...first of all, although I am blindfolded I can of course still hear... and the sounds...
NICK closes his eyes and lets the provocative innuendo sink in.
NICK
And...the last time the blindfold wasn't tied on that well.
NICK also lets that sink in.
Bill...I've seen a few things in my life but never anything like this... And I have never seen such women.
BILL
What does it cost to get into this place?
NICK Forget it.
BILL What do you mean, forget it.
NICK Forget it.
BILL Look, I don't care what it costs.
NICK
It's not a matter of money.  These people aren't interested in money. It's a completely closed affair.
BILL These people.  Who are these people?
NICK
Put it this way - if I knew their names it would be worth more than my life to say them out loud.
BILL
Nick, don't you think you might just be over-dramatizing this a little bit?  There must be some way you can get me in.
NICK
(shakes his head) It would be too dangerous.
BILL Dangerous?
NICK
These are not people you fuck with if you'll pardon the pun.
Nick sees someone looking through the plate glass window.
I'll be right back.
He gets up and hurries outside to the street.
BILL watches him through the window, hunched up against the cold, stamping his feet up and down, talking to a man and writing something down. Nick returns blowing on his hands.
Bill gives him and inquiring look.
BILL Was that the address?
NICK And the password.
BILL Password?
NICK
Yes.  You can't get in without the password and they change it every time.  And. listen, I'm going to have to get weaving pretty soon.
BILL
(said with a smile)
Nick, you son-of-a-bitch, you know you are definitely going to have to take me with you tonight.  You know that, don't you.
Nick sighs and shakes his head.
BILL
Look, I'll tell you what - you give me the password and the address and I'll go there by myself.  There won't be the slightest connection with you, whatsoever.
NICK squirms.
NICK
Look, even if I were crazy enough to do that, you couldn't get in the way you're dressed, anyway.
BILL Why not?
Everyone there is always masked and in costume.
BILL Masked and in costume?
NICK Always.
Bill looks at his watch.
BILL
Okay.  Point taken.  But there's a possibility I know a place that might still be open.
NICK
Bill, you're out of your mind.  No costume place would be open at this time of night.
BILL
Look, Nick, what the hell.  Just give me a chance.  Let me try.  If I can't get the gear I'll forget about the whole thing.  Scouts honour.
NICK looks ready to give in.
BILL Okay?
NICK sighs in resignation.
BILL
Okay.  So, let me have the address and the password, and tell me what kind of costume I need?
EXT. BUSY GREENWICH VILLAGE STREET - NIGHT
BILL's taxi pulls up in front of a costume shop.  A sign says: 'Formal Dress and Costumes. The place is closed.
BILL Shit.
He thinks for a moment, pays the driver and gets out.
He notices a sign that says: "In case of emergency ring apartment 3."
 
He looks up and sees a light on in the apartment above the store.
He rings the bell for apartment 3, which has the name, Gibson..
After a couple of rings, a voice comes over the intercom.
GIBSON Yes, what is it?
BILL talks to the TV security camera.
BILL Mister Gibson?
GIBSON What do you want?
BILL
Mister Gibson, I'm very sorry to disturb you at this hour.  I'm a Doctor.  My name is Harford.  I need to see you.  It's important.
Bill holds up his New York State Medical Board card to the doorway TV security camera.
GIBSON Somebody hurt?
BILL No one's hurt but it's important.
GIBSON What kind of important?
BILL
It would really be better if I could come upstairs for a moment and talk to you.
GIBSON You better come back tomorrow.
BILL
Mr. Gibson, tomorrow will be too late.  I really need to see you now. It won't take long.
Silence.
Then the door buzzer sounds.
BILL pushes open the door and goes upstairs two at a time.
A door opens on the chain and a man in his fifties, wearing flannel pyjamas and a heavy bathrobe, who has the looks and manner of a road-company ham actor peers out.
BILL Mr. Gibson?
GIBSON Yes.
BILL holds up his New York State medical card again.
BILL
Good evening, Mister Gibson.  This is my New York State Medical Board card, just so you know who I am.
Gibson looks at the card and at BILL.
GIBSON Okay, so you're Doctor Harford.
What's this all about?
BILL
Mister Gibson, you may not find it that easy to understand the urgency of this, but basically, uhm...  I need...a costume and a tux..
Gibson stares at him in disbelief.
GIBSON You need a costume and a tux?
BILL Yes.
GIBSON
I'm sorry, but do you honestly expect me to open my shop for you, at this hour?
BILL
I can imagine how this may seem to you, Mister Gibson, and I am prepared to pay an extra two hundred dollars for the inconvenience.
Gibson doesn't reply.
BILL How does that sound to you?
Judging from his expression, this sounds pretty good to Mr.
Gibson.
INT. COSTUME SHOP - NIGHT
A short while later, Gibson leads BILL through the shop to the dimly lit costume section.
GIBSON Okay, now let me get this straight. 
You want a tuxedo, a black monk's cassock and a mask that completely covers your face?
BILL That's it.
GIBSON
I have to tell you doctor, I've had some very strange requests in my day and this is certainly one of them.
BILL It's for a good cause.
GIBSON Okay, you're the doctor.
GIBSON chuckles at his own witticism.
GIBSON
Now, let me get this straight.  You want a tuxedo, a monks cassock and a mask that completely covers your face?
BILL That's it.
Suddenly BILL hears the clink of glasses from somewhere ahead of him. GIBSON flips a light switch.
A light come on in a little office at the end of the passage.
The desk is covered with plates, glasses and bottles.
Two JAPANESE MEN, wearing blonde female wigs, naked except for Japanese kimonos, spring up from their chairs besides the desk.
At the same moment, the semi-naked figure of a graceful GIRL disappears under the desk.
GIBSON rushes forward with long strides, reaches across the desk and grabs one of the blond wigs.
Simultaneously, the young GIRL, maybe fourteen, wriggles out from under the desk and runs along the passage to BILL who catches her in his arms. GIBSON drops the wig and grabs the two kimono garbed men.
At the same time he calls out to BILL.
GIBSON Hold on to that girl for me, please.
The GIRL presses against BILL as if now sure of her protection.  Her pretty little face covered with powder and a smile of impish desire in her eyes.
GIBSON
(shouts)
Gentlemen, you will stay here while I call the police.
KIMONO 1 Gibson, have you gone mad?
KIMONO 2 We were invited by the young lady.
GIBSON You will have to explain this. 
Couldn't you see the girl is unbalanced?
Then GIBSON he turns to BILL.
GIBSON Sorry to keep you waiting.
BILL That's okay.
BILL looks down with fascination at the GIRL, who looks up at him with alluring and childlike eyes, as if spellbound.
The two KIMONO MEN start to argue with each other in Japanese..
GIBSON turns to BILL.
GIBSON
I'm sorry, did you say a brown or black cassock?
BILL Black.
YOUNG GIRL
(with gleaming eyes)
No.  You must give this gentleman a cloak lined with ermine and a doublet of red silk.
GIBSON
(to girl) Don't you budge from there.
(to Bill) What size are you?
BILL I take a 38 jacket.
GIBSON picks up a brown monk's cassock hanging nearby and holds it up for BILL'S approval.
GIBSON This will fit you.
BILL Fine.
GIBSON Okay, let's go and try on the tux..
The two Japanese men are still in the glass partitioned office. GIBSON locks them in._
KIMONO 1
Gibson, this is preposterous!!  You will have to let us out at once.
GIBSON
I'm afraid that's out of the question, gentlemen.  This is now a police matter.  You will kindly wait here until I return.
Ad-libs of further protest from the two men.  The girl skips lightly up the stairs ahead of them.
GIBSON
Now go to bed at once, you depraved creature.  I'll talk to you as soon as I've settled with those two.
The girl gives BILL a sad shake of her head and exits.
INT. FRONT OF COSTUME SHOP - A LITTLE LATER
Bill has changed into a black tuxedo and waits for Gibson to write up the bill.  His clothes and the costume are in two large plastic shopping bags.
GIBSON
Okay - that's a hundred and fifty for the rental.  Three hundred deposit.  And the two hundred inconvenience money.  That's six hundred and fifty bucks..
BILL Okay.
BILL hands him his credit card and his driver's license.
GIBSON I'd prefer cash.
BILL
Sorry, I don't carry that kind of money.
Gibson takes the credit card.
BILL
Thanks.  And - by the way - I hope you wont be too hard on the child.
GIBSON
I'm sorry doctor but I'm not sure what business it is of yours.
BILL
Well, it's just that I first heard you say the girl was unbalanced, and then you called her depraved.  Those things are a little contradictory.
GIBSON
(a bit theatrically)
Well, aren't insanity and depravity the same in the eyes of God?
The last thing BILL wants right now is to get into an argument with GIBSON, so he replies in his most professional manner.
BILL
Well, in any event, there are things that can be done that might help the situation.  Maybe we can have another talk about it tomorrow.
Gibson laughs mockingly without uttering a sound.
EXT. STREET OUTSIDE COSTUME SHOP - NIGHT
Bill, carrying two plastic shopping bags with his clothes in them, hails a taxi. He checks at a slip of paper with the address on it.
BILL
How do you feel about going out to Sands Point Long Island?
The driver makes a face.
BILL How about twenty bucks over the meter?
CAB DRIVER
(shakes his head) I'll have to come back empty.
BILL How's fifty?
CAB DRIVER Fifty's good. EXT. VARIOUS TAXI DRIVE-BYS - NIGHT (2ND UNIT)
Brooklyn Bridge L.I. Expressway
INT. CAB BILL - NIGHT
V.O. Bills Thoughts:  Variations of, "I must be mad."
EXT. LONG ISLAND MANSION ROAD - NIGHT The cab drives slowly down a wooded road.
INT. CAB BILL looking out for the house.
Up ahead, he sees a stretch-limo with darkened windows pulling into a drive protected by iron gates flanked by two gatehouses.
As they drive slowly past the gates, BILL sees a sign that says, 'Bletchly Manor'.
BILL Okay, driver - that's the place.
Stop a little way down the road.
The car comes to a stop.
The meter says $75.50 BILL takes out his wallet.
BILL Okay, here's eighty dollars and...
BILL carefully tears a hundred-dollar bill in half and gives one part to the driver.
BILL
...I promised you fifty bucks over the meter but I'll make it a hundred if you wait for me.  Let the meter run and you'll get the other half plus the meter when I come back... Okay?
The driver gives BILL a wary look.
CAB DRIVER How long will you be?
BILL
That's the thing - I'm not sure.  I could be ten minutes.  I could be an hour or so.  But look, I'm leaving all my stuff in the back.  Okay?
The cab driver takes half of the torn hundred-dollar bill.
CAB DRIVER Okay.
BILL gets out of the cab, puts on the monk's cassock, throws his coat over his shoulders and walks back to the gates. EXT. GATES - NIGHT The iron gates are closed and no one is in sight.
Security cameras look at him.
The road leading to the Manor House curves away into a small wood which covers the house.
BILL rings a bell at the side of the gate and two men promptly come out of the gate house.
GATEMAN 1
(polite and well-spoken) Good morning, sir.
BILL Good morning.
GATEMAN 1 Can we be of any help you?
BILL I suppose you'd like the password?
GATEMAN 1 If you wouldn't mind, sir.
BILL
(slowly) Fidelio Rainbow...
GATEMAN 1 Thank you, sir.
The gate is opened.
GATEMAN 1 Is that your taxi down there, sir?
BILL
Uh - yes.  Yes - my chauffeur came down with the flu at the last minute.
GATEMAN 1
The cabby could have driven you right to the door.
BILL Listen, I'm lucky I got here at all. 
The guy's straight from Bulgaria.
Bill laughs uncomfortably without getting a penny's change from the men.
GATEMAN 1
(pointing a car)
If you'd like to get in the car, sir.  We'll run you up to the house.
BILL Okay.  Thanks.
They get into the car.
Gateman 2 remains at the gate.
INT. CAR Bill sits silently next to the driver. POV - THE LONG ISLAND - MANOR HOUSE - NIGHT
INT. CAR
GATEMAN 1
(tactfully)
This might be a good time to put on your mask, sir.
BILL
(casually) Oh, yes.  Of course.
BILL takes the mask from his pocket and puts it on.
EXT. MANOR HOUSE - NIGHT The car pulls up and BILL gets out.
BILL Thanks.
He walks up the stone steps and the front doors are opened before he reaches them. INT. HOUSE
BILL enters a large, candlelit, mirrored vestibule where two servants in black suits, their faces covered by grey masks, whisper in unison:
SERVANTS Password?
BILL Fidelio Rainbow.
SERVANT 1
Thank you, sir.  One of them takes his coat, while the other opens a door.
BILL enters a long room, dimly lit with candles, with high ceilings and walls covered with black silk.
A line of mirrored doors on each side run the length of the room.
There are about fifty men and women dressed as monks and nuns, their faces completely covered by masks.
Gently swelling strains of Italian liturgical music comes from an organ playing somewhere.
As his eyes become accustomed to the dim light, BILL sees that the women are naked beneath the full-length, black veils that flow down from their head bands.
His eyes wander from voluptuous bodies to slender bodies, from delicate to richly developed figures, and he is filled with inexpressible desire.
Occasionally, eyes turn towards him but immediately look away as soon as he notices them.
A monk brushes against him and nods a greeting, but from behind the mask BILL sense a searching and penetrating glance.
A strange, heavy perfume, as of southern gardens, pervades the room.
Again an arm brushes against him, but this time it is that of a nun.
Her face is fully masked, and like the others, naked under the black transparent lace of her veil.
THE WOMAN
You don't belong here.  There's still a chance for you to get away.
BILL is momentarily unnerved by this but he is also completely captivated by the beauty and sensuality of this woman.
BILL
I'm terribly sorry but I think you've mistaken me for someone else.
THE WOMAN Please don't be foolish about this. 
You must leave at once.
BILL Who are you?
THE WOMAN It doesn't matter.  You must go.
BILL Will you come with me?
THE WOMAN That's impossible.
BILL Impossible?
THE WOMAN Impossible.
BILL
Is there someplace else here we could go?
THE WOMAN
Absolutely not.  Please believe me, if you are discovered it will go hard with you.
BILL moves closer to her but she steps back.
ANOTHER WOMAN
What's the matter.  Why don't you dance?
BILL sees two men watching him from another corner and suspects that this woman has been sent to put him to the test. He smiles.
BILL I would love to dance.
But just at that moment, THE WOMAN returns.
She pretends that she has just noticed him and says in a voice that can be heard by the two men.
THE WOMAN Returned at last.
(she laughs)
All your efforts are useless.  I know you.
Then turning to the other woman she whispers:
THE WOMAN
Let me have him first - just for a while.
The other woman smiles agreement, and with a light step goes to join the two men who have been watching.
THE WOMAN
Don't ask any questions, and don't be surprised at anything.
THE WOMAN
I have tried to lead them astray but you can't fool them for much longer. Go before it is too late, - and be careful that no one follows you.  No one must know who you are.  There would be no more peace for you.  Go!
BILL
Is there any way --
THE WOMAN There is no way.
He takes her hand and draws her closer to him.
BILL I must see you again.
She whispers, despairingly.
THE WOMAN Go.
BILL
Is there no way I can ever see you again.
THE WOMAN
No.  We must never meet again.  It could cost your life and mine.
Just at that moment, a tall man stops before them, and with a slight bow, courteous but imperative, says:
TALL MAN Will you dance with me?
THE WOMAN hesitates but the TALL MAN puts his arm around her waist and leads her away the adjoining room. A moment later, a voice whispers behind BILL.
ELEGANT MAN Password!
BILL turns around and sees two men.
One, heavy-set, the other, slim and elegant.
ELEGANT MAN Password!
BILL Fidelio Rainbow.
ELEGANT MAN
That's right, sir.  That's the password for admittance, but may I ask what is the password for the house?
BILL is stuck.  He takes a deep breath...
ELEGANT MAN
Won't you be kind enough to tell me the password of the house?
This time it sounds like a threat.
BILL can't think of anything to say.  He shakes his head and shrugs.
BILL
Sorry.  It looks like I must have forgotten it.
The elegant man walks to the middle of the room and raises his hand. Everything gradually comes to a stop.
Blindfolded, Nick stops playing when someone places a hand on his shoulder and whispers something to him. With all eyes on him, the two men walk back to BILL.
ELEGANT MAN
The password, sir!  I must demand that you give it.
BILL
Look, I'm terribly sorry but I've told you, I must have forgotten it.
ELEGANT MAN
That's unfortunate.  For here it doesn't matter whether you have forgotten it or if you never knew it.
The rest of the men slowly gather around BILL.
BILL
Well, gentlemen, I seem to owe you all an apology.
ELEGANT MAN It is too late for apologies.
BILL
Well, be that as it may, you have my most sincere regrets for not remembering the second password.
ELEGANT MAN
I'm afraid this is not a question of regret but of expiation.
BILL
Well, gentlemen, you must excuse me now.  I am leaving.
ELEGANT MAN I'm afraid that is no longer possible.
BILL
Gentlemen, don't you think this farce has gone far enough?
BILL looks for a way out but no one makes way for him.
ELEGANT MAN You will kindly remove your mask.
BILL looks around at the masked faces surrounding him.
ELEGANT MAN
(sharply) Please remove your mask.
BILL slowly removes his mask and puts it in his pocket.
THE WOMAN I am ready to redeem him.
There is a murmur of surprise in the room.  THE WOMAN reaches for the veil, which is wrapped around her head, face and neck and unwinds it with a wonderful circular movement.
It sinks to the floor, leaving her naked, her dark hair falling in great profusion over her shoulders, breasts and hips.
ELEGANT MAN You are ready to redeem him?
THE WOMAN Yes, I am.
There is a low gasp from the assemblage.
ELEGANT MAN
You know what you're taking upon yourself in doing this?
THE WOMAN Yes.
Another murmur from the room.
The elegant man turns back to BILL.
ELEGANT MAN
You are free.  Leave this house at once.  But first I must warn you that if you make any further inquiries or inform anyone about what you have seen here tonight, there will be the most serious consequences for yourself and your family.  Do you understand that?
BILL doesn't reply immediately.
BILL How is this woman to redeem me?
ELEGANT MAN That has nothing to do with you.
BILL shakes his head.
BILL I can't let this woman pay for me.
ELEGANT MAN
You would be unable, in any case, to change her fate.  When a promise has been made here there is no turning back.
THE WOMAN Go!  You cannot save me.
As she says this, she tears off the mask, allowing BILL a momentary glimpse of her face. Then he is seized by irresistible arms and pushed out.
INT. BILL'S APARTMENT - NIGHT It is four o'clock in the morning.
BILL, now changed back into his own clothes, enters his apartment.
Everyone is asleep.
He goes into his study and locks the costume and tux in a closet.
In order not to wake ALICE, he undresses before going into the bedroom. BEDROOM
ALICE is asleep, lying with her arms folded under her head Her lips are half open and painful shadows surround them.
It is a face BILL does not know.
He bends down over her, and at once her forehead becomes lined with furrows, as though someone had touched it, and her features seem strangely distorted.
Suddenly, still in her sleep, she laughs so shrilly that he becomes alarmed.
BILL
(invonluntarily) Alice.
She laughs again, as if in answer, in a strange, almost uncanny manner.
BILL Alice?
She opens her eyes, slowly and with difficulty.
She stares at him, as though she does not recognize him.
BILL Alice?
As she wakes up, an expression of fear, even of terror comes into her eyes. Half awake, and seemingly in despair, she raises her arms.
BILL What's the matter?
ALICE stares at him, still frightened.
BILL Alice, it's me.
ALICE breathes deeply, tries to smile, drops her arms on the blanket.
ALICE
(in a far away voice) Is it morning yet?
BILL
It will be very soon.  It's a little past four o'clock.  I've just come home.
She nods but barely seems to have heard or understood him.
She stares into space, as though she can see through him.
He bends over and touches her forehead.
She shudders slightly.
BILL What's the matter?
She shakes her head slowly and he passes his hand gently over her hair.
BILL Alice, you laughed so strangely.
What's the matter?
ALICE
(distantly) I've been dreaming.
BILL
(gently) What have you been dreaming?
ALICE Oh, so much, I can't quite remember.
BILL Perhaps if you try.
ALICE
It was all so confused - and I'm tired.  You must be tired, too.
BILL
Not really.  I don't think I'll go to bed at all.  You know, sometimes when I come home so late it's better to just go straight to work.
ALICE nods without interest.
 
But why don't you tell me about your dream?
He smiles a little artificially.
ALICE
You really ought to lie down and take a little rest.
BILL hesitates a moment, then he stretches himself beside her, though he is careful not to touch her.
They lie there silently with open eyes, and they feel both their closeness and the distance that separates them.
After a while he raises his head on his arm and looks at her for a long time, as though he can see much more than just the outlines of her face.
BILL Tell me about your dream.
Bill says this, once more, as if she had been waiting for his invitation.
She holds out her hand to him, he takes it, and as he had often done before, he holds it and plays with her slender fingers, more absent-mindedly than tenderly. ALICE sighs and begins to speak uncertainly.
ALICE
I think it started in my parents house.  They weren't there.  I was alone.  That surprised me because our wedding was the next day and I didn't have a wedding dress.  Then you and I were floating above a ancient city.  It was a kind of crazy mix of ancient architectural styles. Oriental, Egyptian, Greek and Roman architecture.  And it was completely deserted.  The streets were empty no people, no animals.  And I remember thinking, so this is our honeymoon. Then it was night and the sky was so full of stars, and so blue and wide it seemed like it was painted.  You said it was the ceiling of our bridal chamber and you took me in your arms and made love to me and said you would love me forever.
I hope you loved me, too.
BILL says this with an invisible, malicious smile.
ALICE
Even more than you did me.  We made love and it was wonderful, though there was a sadness to it, and a presentment of sorrow.  Suddenly it was morning and we were somewhere in the strange city.  We were still completely alone.  But something terrible had happened - our clothes were gone.  I was terrified as I had never been before, and felt such a burning shame that it almost consumed me.  At the same time I was furious with you because I thought it was your fault.  And this sensation of terror, shame and fury was more intense than any emotion I had ever felt before.  You felt guilty and rushed away naked, to go and get clothes for us.  As soon as you were gone I felt wonderful.  I neither felt sorry for you, or worried about you.  It was heavenly to be alone. 
I was lying in a lush garden, stretched out naked in the sunlight, and I was far more beautiful than I ever was in reality.  And while I lay there, a young man walked out of the woods.  He was the young Naval officer I told you about from the hotel.  He looked different but I knew it was him.  He stopped in front of me and looked at me searchingly. I laughed seductively and wantonly, as I have never laughed in my life, and he held out his arms to me and sank down beside me.  ALICE falls silent.  BILLS throat is parched. In the darkness of the room he can see she has concealed her face in her hands.
BILL
A strange dream, but that's not the end, is it?
ALICE doesn't reply.
Was that the end?
ALICE No.
BILL
Then why don't you tell me the rest of it?
ALICE
It's not easy.  Some things are not easy to say.
BILL It's was only a dream.
ALICE sighs and continues, hesitantly.
ALICE
He looked at me...and slowly took me in his arms...and we began making love.  I seemed to live through countless days and nights - there was neither time nor space.  And the more we made love the more our hunger for each other increased.  And just as that earlier feeling of terror and shame went beyond anything I had ever felt, so nothing can be compared with the freedom and happiness and the... desire that I now felt.
Then I realized there other couples around us - hundreds of them, and they too were making love.  Then I was making love to the other men, and as soon as my longing was satisfied with one, I wanted another. 
I can't say how many I was with.
And yet I didn't for one moment forget you.  And all this time, you were buying the most beautiful clothes and jewelery you could find for me. Then you were being followed by a crowd of people who were shouting threats.  Then you were seized by soldiers, and there were also priests among them.  Somebody - a gigantic person, tied your hands.  You were still naked.  I knew you were going to be crucified but I felt no sympathy for you.  I still blamed you for everything that had happened.
 
ALICE
I felt that I was far removed from you but I knew you could see me naked in the arms of countless men in this sea of nakedness which foamed around me.  The soldiers began to whip you and blood flowed down you in streams. I saw it without feeling any surprise or pity.  Then you smiled at me as if to show you had fulfilled my wish and bought me everything I wanted. 
But I thought your actions were ridiculous and I wanted to make fun of you - to laugh in your face. They began to nail you to the cross and I hoped that you would be able to hear my laughter.  And so I laughed as shrill and loud as I could... That must have been the laugh that you heard when I woke up.  Neither of them moves or says anything.  Any remark at this moment would seem futile.
BILL realizes he is still holding ALICE'S hand.
She remains silent and motionless.
Ready as he is to hate her, his feeling of tenderness for these slender, cool fingers is unchanged except that it is more acute.
Involuntarily, he gently presses his lips on the familiar hand before he lets it go.
ALICE'S eyes are closed and there is the trace of a happy, innocent smile playing about her mouth. He feels an incomprehensible desire to make love to her.
He rolls over and puts his arm around her but then checks himself. He stretches himself out beside ALICE, who now seems asleep.
As he closes his eyes, he thinks:
V.O. Whore of her dreams.  There is now a sword between us.  We are lying here like mortal enemies.
INT. BILL'S APARTMENT - BEDROOM - DAWN
BILL rises at 6 o'clock and dresses while ALICE is still asleep.  He has only had a couple of hours sleep and looks awful. HELENA'S BEDROOM
On his way out he stops off in his daughter's room.  She is asleep in her bed.  He kisses her on the forehead. STUDY He collects his costume and leaves.
EXT. CAFE SONATA - DAY Taxi pulls up and BILL gets out.
He takes a cab to the Cafe Sonata where he met Nick Nightingale.
It is closed but he peers in through the window and sees the chairs are stacked on the tables and the place is being cleaned. He taps on the glass.
After a couple of "we're closed" wave-offs from the manageress working at a table in the back, the door is finally opened by one of the cleaners.
BILL
Good morning.  I'd like to have a quick word with the manager, if I may.
CLEANING LADY Someone for you, Vicki.
MANAGERESS Okay.
Bill walks to the table she is seated at.
BILL Good morning.
MANAGERESS What can I do for you?
BILL
It's very important that I get in touch with Nick Nightingale.
MANAGERESS He'll be in tonight.
BILL
It's something I need to see him about this morning.
MANAGERESS
It's not our policy to give out employees addresses.
BILL Of course.  I completely understand. 
But I'm a doctor...
(shows her his medical card)
...and this is a personal medical matter.  I know he'll want to know about as soon as possible.
EXT. HOTEL JASON - DAY BILL's taxi pulls up.  It's a small, mid-town hotel.
INT. - LOBBY
There is no one in the lobby except for the DESK CLERK, a man in his early thirties, reading a paperback.
BILL Good morning.
DESK CLERK
Good morning, sir.  How can I help you?
BILL
Can you ring Mr. Nightingale's room for me, please?
The DESK CLERK gives him a strange look.
BILL Nick Nightingale?
DESK CLERK
I'm sorry, sir, but he's checked out.
The DESK CLERK has a slight, gay lisp.
BILL He checked out?
DESK CLERK Yes.
BILL Did he leave a forwarding address?
DESK CLERK No, I'm afraid not.
BILL When did he check out?
DESK CLERK About five o'clock this morning.
BILL
Five o'clock.  That's a pretty early check out, isn't it?
DESK CLERK It is a little bit on the early side.
BILL
Did you happen to notice whether there was there anything strange about him when he left?
DESK CLERK You aren't a detective, by any chance?
BILL
No, I'm a doctor.  Nick and I are old friends.
DESK CLERK
Well, since you ask, there was something very strange about the way Mr. Nightingale left.
BILL What was that?
DESK CLERK
Well, he came in at about four-thirty
a.m.  There were two men with him big guys. 
The DESK CLERK bends his elbows and clenches his fists to make a 'big-guy' gesture.
DESK CLERK
And I noticed he had a bruise on his cheek I'm sure he didn't have the night before.
DESK CLERK
The two men with him were well-dressed and well-spoken, but they weren't the kind of people you'd want to fool around with, if you know what I mean.  Mr. Nightingale said he would be checking out and went up to his room with one of the men.  The other one stayed in the lobby and settled his bill, which was a couple of weeks overdue.  When they came down, I thought Mr. Nightingale looked... well - scared.
Very scared, if you ask me.  He tried to pass me an envelope but they saw him and took it away and said any mail or messages for him would be collected by a person properly authorized to do so.  When they took him outside, I could see there was a car waiting for them.
BILL No idea where they might have gone?
DESK CLERK None at all.
EXT. COSTUME SHOP - DAY BILL enters.
INT. COSTUME SHOP - DAY
GIBSON Ah-hhh, the good doctor.
BILL Good afternoon.
GIBSON Did you enjoy your evening?
BILL Yes, it was fine.
BILL hands him the clothes.  Gibson carefully takes the them out of the bag and lays them out on the counter to check them.
GIBSON I think you've forgotten the mask.
BILL Oh - isn't it there?
GIBSON
It's not here.  Maybe you left it at the party.
BILL I don't know.  I must have lost it. 
Just put it on the bill.
GIBSON
Okay and if it turns up just bring it in and I'll give you a refund.
BILL Fine.
BILL watches as GIBSON writes up the bill.
BILL
I wonder if this might be a good time to have a word or two about your daughter?
The question a peculiar expression about Gibson's nostrils.
GIBSON A word or two about my daughter?
BILL speaks with outstretched fingers resting on the desk.
BILL
Well, it's just that last night I think you said that your daughter was not quite normal, mentally.  The situation in which we found her certainly suggests something like that.  And since I took part in it, or was at least a spectator, I feel I should recommend that you get some medical advice.
GIBSON smiles at BILL, insolently.
GIBSON
And I suppose you yourself would like to take charge of the treatment?
At this moment, a door which leads to one of the inner rooms opens, and a young man with a top-coat over his evening clothes steps out.
BILL recognizes him as one of the KIMONO men from the night before.
He also catches a glimpse of the YOUNG GIRL, in bra and panties getting dressed, behind him before the door closes.
The KIMONO MAN seems taken aback when he sees BILL, but he regains his composure at once.
He lights a cigarette with a match from Gibson's counter, waves goodbye and leaves the shop.
BILL So that's how it is.
GIBSON
(with perfect equanimity)
What did you say?
BILL
Last night you were going to call the police.
GIBSON We've come to another arrangement.
Gibson slides the credit-card slip across the desk.
BILL looks it over.
GIBSON
Okay.  It's a hundred and fifty for the basic rental.  Two hundred for the inconvenience.  Twenty five for the mask.  And I've credited the three hundred deposit.  Okay?
BILL nods.
GIBSON
And if the doctor should ever want anything again...
(smiles) ...it needn't be a monk's costume.
EXT. BILL'S SURGERY - DAY
BILL hails a taxi and makes a another deal to go to the house in Long Island. EXT. VARIOUS POV'S - DAY - 59th street Bridge.
- L.I. Express way.
EXT. LONG ISLAND MANSION - DAY
When the cab arrives there, nothing suspicious is in sight, no cars or pedestrians.
It stops a little past the house and BILL get out and walks to the gates. The big gates are locked and there is no one in sight.
He hears the faint whine of the zoom lens motor on one of the surveillance cameras.
He looks up anxiously but is determined to carry out his inquiry. He rings the bell mounted on one of the gate pillars.
He hears the motor on another surveillance camera, as it pans on to him. He waits.
A few moments later, a car slowly approaches down the road from the house and stops at the gate. An elderly servant gets out and walks slowly to the gate.
He holds a letter and without a word pushes it through the iron bars to BILL, whose heart is beating wildly.
BILL For me?
The servant nods, walks back to the car and drives back up the road.
BILL looks at the envelope and sees: 'Dr. William Harford' written on it in a neat, dignified handwriting. How did they know his name?
He opens the envelope and unfolds a sheet of writing paper. 
"Give up your inquiries which are completely useless, and consider these words a second warning.  We hope, for your own good, that this will be sufficient." BILL stands there looking at the note.
EXT. CAB - DAY
Driving back to New York
INT. CAB - DAY BILL looks up from the letter, thoughtfully.
V.O. Second warning?  Why the second warning - and not the last?
The tone of the note was strangely reserved and seemed to show that the people who sent it by no means felt secure.  The note disappointed him, though, in a way, it reassured him, just why he couldn't say.  But, at least, he now felt the woman had come to no real harm, and that it would be possible to find her if he went about it cautiously and cleverly.
INT. BILL'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
BILL is eating.  ALICE and HELENA with him, keeping him company at the table.
Some simple, natural dialog will be worked out for the action, over which the V.O. will be heard.
V.O. He had gone home, feeling a little tired but surprisingly cheerful, with a strange sense of security, which somehow seemed deceptive. He was in an excited and cheerful mood and he felt unusually fresh and clear in spite of spending the last two nights without sleep At the same time, he felt that all this order, this normality, all the security of his existence, was nothing but deception and delusion.
POV of ALICE smiling.
V.O. And, he thought, there she sits with an angelic look, like a good wife and mother - the whore of her dreams who made love to a hundred men the preceding night and laughed when he was crucified, and to his surprise he didn't hate her.
ALICE Do you have to go out tonight?
BILL
I'm afraid so.  I've got some patients to see in the hospital.
EXT. MARION'S APARTMENT - NIGHT BILL gets out of a cab.
INT. MARION'S LOBBY - NIGHT
He meets, her fiance, Carl, on his way out.  Carl holds out his hand cordially and they exchange greetings.
BILL How is Marion?
CARL Only so-so.
BILL
I was hoping she would have begun to come to terms with things by now.
Carl shakes his head.
CARL
She's taken it very hard.  And when came for the body...it was just terrible.
BILL
I suppose her relatives are with her now?
CARL
No, they won't be coming until tonight.  She'll be very glad to have some company.  I'm taking her to stay with my mother in Connecticut tomorrow.
BILL That's probably just what she needs.
CARL
(putting out his hand)
Well, good to see you again.  It's unbelievable how much there is to do to arrange a funeral.
INT. MARION'S APARTMENT - NIGHT Marion opens the door.
She is dressed in black.  Her face becomes slightly flushed.
MARION
(smiling wearily) You made me wait a long time.
BILL
I'm sorry, Marion.  This was a particularly busy day for me.
In the living room, Marion smiles and offers him a seat on the couch, sitting down next to him. BILL takes her hand in his and looks at her warmly.
She makes little attempt to hide her desperate love.
BILL
I bumped into Carl downstairs.  He said you're going to Connecticut tomorrow.
She gazes into his eyes, mournfully.
MARION I won't go if you don't want me to.
BILL gives her a long look, leans forward and kisses her on the lips. They embrace and fall back on the couch.
MARION
Oh, Bill, I love you.  I love you so much.
He kisses her and starts to fondle her breasts and other regions.
MARION
(whimpers) Oh, Bill, I love you.  I love you.
BILL Marion.
BILL just pronounces her name softly and continues to undo her clothes. Then she begins to weep.
BILL tries to ignore this but she doesn't stop.
BILL
(whispers) What's wrong?
At first, MARION doesn't reply.
BILL What's wrong?
MARION
(smiling through her tears)
Nothing.
BILL Nothing.
BILL sits up.
BILL Martion, what is the matter?
MARION
Oh, Bill, it's just that it all seems so hopeless.
BILL frowns.
MARION What's going to happen to us?
This is definitely not what BILL had in mind and he looks away.
MARION
Are you angry with me for saying that?
BILL No, of course not.
MARION You are angry.
BILL I'm not angry.
She rests her chin on his shoulder.
MARION
Oh, Bill...  Say something nice to me.  I am so confused.
BILL doesn't move.
BILL
Marion, I guess this is crazy.  I'm a happily married man with a child, and you are engaged to Carl.
Marion's shoulders droop.
BILL
I'm sure the best thing for you to do is to go Connecticut tomorrow with Carl as you had planned.  A complete change of environment and the fresh air will do you a world of good.
Marion sits motionless and tears begin to stream down her face.
BILL sits in silence for a few moments, feeling impatience rather than sympathy. Then he looks at his watch and gets to his feet.
BILL
Marion, my dear, much as I regret it...
He would gladly say something kinder to her, but finds it difficult to do so.
BILL
If we don't see each other before the wedding, let me offer you my most sincere congratulations and best wishes.
She doesn't move, as though she understands neither his congratulations nor his farewell.
He holds out his hand but she refuses it, and he says almost reproachfully:
BILL
I hope you'll keep in touch and let me know how you are.
She sits there as if turned to stone.
BILL Goodbye Marion.
He leaves the room, stopping for a second in the doorway, as though giving her a last opportunity to call him back.
But she turns her head away. EXT. STREET - ON WAY TO DOMINO - NIGHT BILL walks. INT./EXT. BAKERY - BILL BUYS A CAKE - NIGHT Seen through the window.
EXT. DOMINO STREET - NIGHT
Bill walks down the street where he was picked up the night before by the young prostitute, Domino. He carries a small cake-box tied with a blue ribbon.
He finds the address and rings the bell.  The buzzer sounds and he goes in. INT. DOMINO STAIRCASE CORRIDOR - NIGHT
An arty looking woman in her forties opens the door on the chain.
ARTY WOMAN Hi.  What can I do for you?
BILL Good evening.  I'm looking for Domino.
ARTY WOMAN Domino?
BILL Yes.  Is she in by any chance?
An attractive girl in her twenties, wet hair and wrapped in a towel robe, pokes her head out.
SALLY
(smiles)
You're looking for Domino?  You'll have to excuse the way I look.  I just got out of the bath..
BILL Yes.  Is she in?
SALLY takes the door off the chain.
SALLY Come in for a minute.
INT. DOMINO APARTMENT - NIGHT Bill enters the apartment.
SALLY Hi.  I'm Sally.  This is Pietra.
Ad-libs of hellos.
Bill looks around - no Domino.
SALLY Well, as you can see, Domino's out.
BILL Okay.  Do you expect her back soon?
SALLY I don't think so.
ARTY WOMAN Maybe tomorrow.
BILL
Okay.  Well, I'll just leave this cake for her, if I may.
ARTY WOMAN
(takes the cake)
Okay.  Great.  We'll see that she gets it.
BILL Is she out of town?
ARTY WOMAN
Uh--no, actually, she's in the hospital.
Sally gives her a look.
BILL
Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.  I hope it's nothing serious.
ARTY WOMAN
We're not really sure.  It was for some kind of tests.
Sally gives her another look and moves close to BILL, her towel robe parting a little to show her naked underneath.
SALLY
Listen, I'm not sure what's was on your mind but if it was more than cake, there's nothing wrong with me.
BILL hesitates.
BILL
Look, I'd love to but some other time.  Okay?  I was just passing by with the cake.
SALLY You sure?
BILL I've really got to go. EXT. DOMINO STREET - BILL WALKING - NIGHT
V.O. Was this another and final sign that everything he put his hand to was bound to turn out a failure for him? But why should it be.  Wasn't the fact that he had just escaped a possibly fatal infection from the girl a good sign?  Everything now seemed so unreal; his home, his wife, his child, his profession, and even himself.  Bill felt choked with tears. 
He had not slept for two days and his nerves were gradually giving way.  He intentionally struck up a quicker pace than he was in the mood for.
EXT. STREET - BILL FOLLOWED - NIGHT Suddenly, BILL feels he is being followed.
He glances back and sees a man about half a block behind him walking at the same rapid pace.
As soon as the man notices BILL has seen him, he stops and looks in a shop window. SHORT SEQUENCE OF THE MAN FOLLOWING BILL - SEVERAL STREETS
STREET - NEWS-STAND NEAR COFFEE SHOP BILL stops at the newsstand and buys a paper. He looks back again.
The man is still there, walking slowly towards him.
BILL goes into a nearby Coffee Bar.
INT. COFFEE BAR - NIGHT
Bill sits down at a table against the wall, keeping an eye on the door.
A waitress comes over with a glass of ice water and a plastic menu.
WAITRESS Hi.  Would you like to order now?
BILL Sure.
BILL manages a tired smile and looks at the menu.
BILL
I'll have...a cup of coffee and...maybe a cheese Danish.
WAITRESS Okay, great.
She leaves, taking away the menu.
BILL opens his eyes as wide as possible, arches his neck and drinks some water.  He looks terrible.
He idly picks up the newspaper he just bought and starts to look through it. A story catches his eye.
EX-BEAUTY QUEEN IN HOTEL DRUGS OVERDOSE
Kelly Curran, 30, a former Miss Wisconsin, was taken to New
York Hospital this morning in critical condition after taking a drugs overdose.  She was found unconscious when police broke into her room at the San Carlos hotel after she failed to respond to efforts to contact her.
The night manager told police she had returned to the hotel at four o'clock in the morning accompanied by two unidentified men.
V.O. Four o'clock in the morning!  The same time he returned home! And accompanied by_two men_!
V.O. Wasn't it two men who took Nick
Nightingale from his hotel only an hour later?  There was no compelling reason to believe that Kelly Curran and a certain other woman were one and the same.  And yet - his heart throbbed and his hand trembled.
BILL looks for the waitress to get his check.
At the same time, he notices the man who had been following him sitting at another table. The man slowly raises a newspaper, partly covering his face.
BILL pays his check.
At the door, he turns to look for the suspicious character at the table but he is already gone. EXT. HOSPITAL - NIGHT
ESTABLISHING SHOT
INT. HOSPITAL BILL the signs to the Emergency Room Waiting Area.
He walks up a young black woman at the information desk.
BILL Good evening, I'm Doctor Harford. 
I'd like to see a patient of mine who I believe was admitted this morning.
He shows her his identity card.
CLERK
Okay, thanks, Doctor.  What did you say the name was?
BILL Curran, Kelly Curran.
CLERK C..u..r..r..a..n?
BILL Yes.
The woman keyboards the letters into her computer.
Something comes up on her screen that makes her stop.
CLERK Kelly Curran, right?
BILL That's right.
CLERK
I'm sorry, doctor, but I'm afraid she died this afternoon.
BILL What?
CLERK Yes, at three-forty five, p.m.
BILL stares at her.
He feels strangely relieved.
BILL Is the body in the hospital morgue?
INT. HOSPITAL CORRIDOR ON WAY TO MORGUE BILL follows a black male orderly down a hospital corridor.
INT. MORGUE
The morgue is a brightly lit, white-tiled room with six autopsy tables and fifty numbered crypts.  There is no one else working in the room.
The black orderly checks a slip of paper and goes to that crypt.
He opens the door, slides out the pallet and pulls down the sheet covering the body. BILL stares down at the naked body of a young woman.
The orderly gives BILL an inquiring look.  BILL nods and the orderly crosses the room and lights a cigarette. BILL lifts the woman's head a little.
Her face is white.  Her half-closed eyes stare at him.  The lower jaw hangs down limply, the narrow upper lip is drawn up, revealing bluish gums and a beautiful set of white teeth. He gently lays her head back on the pallet.
His eyes follow the lines of her body.
He touches her forehead and her cheeks, her shoulders and her arms, doing so as if compelled and directed to by an invisible power.
He twines his fingers about those of the corpse, and rigid as they are, they seem to make an effort to move, to seize his hand. He bends over her, as if magically attracted.
V.O. Was this the woman he was seeking? Were these the eyes that had shone at him the day before with so much passion?  Was this the alluring body for which, only yesterday, he had felt such agonizing desire?  He bent lower, as if he could extract an answer from the rigid features.  But he had only seen her face for an instant, and he knew that if it were her face, and her eyes, he would not, could not - and in reality did not want to know.  He also realized that from the time he read the account in the newspaper, he had imagined her as having the features of his wife.  And he shuddered to realize that his wife had constantly been in his mind's eye as the woman he had been seeking.
He frees his fingers from those of the corpse, and taking her thin wrists, places the ice cold arms alongside the body very carefully. He looks at the orderly.
BILL Okay - thanks.  I'm finished.
Bill watches the orderly slide the pallet back into the crypt and close the door.
ORDERLY
Want to wash up, Doc?  He gestures to a row of sinks.
BILL Thanks.
BILL goes over and carefully washes his hands with disinfectant. His cellular phone goes off.
BILL
Hello...  Yes...  That's perfectly all right...  Okay...  Oh, I guess about twenty minutes...  Okay... Goodbye.
EXT. ZIEGLER MANSION - NIGHT BILL's taxi pulls up.
There are only a few lights on inside, giving the house a more sombre appearance from the night of the Christmas party. The butler opens the door and takes BILL's coat.
Ziegler's assistant, HARRIS, appears.
HARRIS Good evening, Dr. Harford.
BILL Good evening.
HARRIS Thank you for coming over so quickly.
BILL What seems to be the problem?
HARRIS
I'm afraid I don't know.  Will you follow me, please?
BILL follows HARRIS.  Their footsteps sound loud in the quiet house. They stop in front of the library door and HARRIS knocks.
ZIEGLER (O.S.) Come in.
HARRIS opens the door for BILL and closes it behind him, remaining outside. ZIEGLER gets up from an armchair and shakes hands.
ZIEGLER
Hi, Bill.  Sorry to drag you over here at this time of night.
BILL No problem.
ZIEGLER What are you drinking?
BILL
Well, I suppose a brandy would be nice.
ZIEGLER
(going to the bar)
It was lovely to see you and Alice the other night.
BILL
It was a wonderful party and we had a great time.
ZIEGLER
It's a shame you had to leave so early.
BILL
We hated to go but I had a couple of early appointments.
ZIEGLER hands him his brandy and they touch glasses.
BOTH Cheers.
BILL Nice..
ZIEGLER Napoleon, 1935.
BILL looks suitably impressed.
BILL So - what seems to be the problem?
Someone under the weather?
ZIEGLER looks into his brandy glass.
ZIEGLER Can I be frank, Bill?
BILL Of course.
 
I'm afraid what I've got to say is a bit awkward to talk about.
BILL I'm your doctor.
ZIEGLER rotates his brandy.
ZIEGLER This isn't a medical problem.
BILL Oh.
ZIEGLER No.
BILL looks at him, quizzically.
ZIEGLER nods and returns a tense smile.
ZIEGLER
I'm not exactly sure how to begin this.  But maybe the best thing is to just to put the cards on the table and say that I happen to know quite a lot about what you've been doing for the past twenty-four hours.
He lets this sink in.
BILL
Sorry, Victor but may I ask what the hell are you're talking about?
ZIEGLER
(quietly)
Bill, please believe me, I know this is awkward - perhaps as awkward for me as it is for you.  Okay?
Bill says nothing.
ZIEGLER
Okay?...  Now, the reason I wanted to talk to you is that I think you may be harbouring one or two misapprehensions about last night, which I would like to clear up.
SILENCE.
Okay.  I think I should also tell you that I was there.  At the house.
ZIEGLER says this in a very matter-of-fact way.
ZIEGLER I saw everything that happened.
A long pause.
BILL Well, what an amazing coincidence.
ZIEGLER
The words practically right out of my mouth.  An amazing coincidence. That's what I first thought.  But then I remembered seeing you and your musician friend, Nick, renewing old acquaintances at the party, and it didn't take me very long to realize that the rotten little prick was the reason you were there.
Bill gets to his feet.  There's no point in denying anything and he has to protect Nick.
BILL Look, Victor, this was all my fault. 
Nick did his best to talk me out of it.
ZIEGLER
Yes, I know.  He told us.  But the fact remains that the little cocksucker told you in the first place and gave you the password and the address.
BILL
It was all down to me pressurising him.
ZIEGLER
Maybe so, but I recommended him to these people and he betrayed my trust.
BILL hesitates.
BILL I went to his hotel this morning.
I know.
BILL How's that?
ZIEGLER
That was my man following you.  He told me you spotted him.
BILL shakes his head incredulously.
BILL Why did you have me followed?
ZIEGLER
For your own good?  To avoid any foolishness?
BILL
The hotel clerk said two men took him away at five-thirty this morning.
ZIEGLER
That's right.  They gave him an airline ticket and took him to the airport.  By now he's probably back with his family in Seattle.
BILL
The clerk said he had a bruise on his cheek.
ZIEGLER Is that all?
BILL Is he okay?
ZIEGLER
He's a lot better than he deserves to be.
BILL Nothing else?
ZIEGLER
He's okay.  Phone him in Seattle if you're concerned.  I'll give you his phone number.
ZIEGLER pours more brandy.
 
BILL
Nick never said anything about a second password.  Was that what gave me away?
ZIEGLER
There was no second password.  You gave yourself away as soon as you arrived.  Invited guests come in limos not taxis, and they don't get out of their cars half a block from the gate.  After the servants took your coat, one of our people went through your pockets and found the receipt for the rented tux and cassock made out to Doctor W. Harford, a name obviously not on the guest list.
ZIEGLER sips some brandy.
ZIEGLER
Bill, these were not just ordinary people.  I don't think you have any idea how fortunate you are to have got out of that situation as easily as you did.  Someday you can thank me for that.
BILL What about the woman?
ZIEGLER Not at all what you think.
BILL Why did she try to warn me?
ZIEGLER doesn't answer immediately.
BILL
Why was she willing to sacrifice herself for me?
ZIEGLER
Bill, are you so sure she was the kind of woman for whom the things you imagined were actually a sacrifice?  If she attended these affairs and knew the rules so well, do you suppose it would have made any difference to her whether she belonged to one of the men, or to all of them?
ZIEGLER
Bill, she was just a thousand-a-nighthooker - no more, no less.
BILL stares at him blankly.
ZIEGLER
Bill, tell me, did you never consider the possibility that the whole thing might have been nothing more than a charade?...  A charade played out for the benefit of someone who didn't belong - to frighten them and make sure they keep quiet?
BILL takes a deep breath and tries to absorb what he has just been told Then takes the newspaper from his pocket with the story about the drugs overdose.
BILL What about this?
ZIEGLER What about it?
BILL
Is it her?  I went to the morgue but I couldn't tell.
ZIEGLER It is her.
BILL
(quietly)
Is this what she meant when she said she would redeem me?
ZIEGLER
No - it wasn't.  But I was afraid you might think it was, and that's why I wanted to see you.
BILL
You say it was a charade but isn't it a bit strange, a woman offers herself as a sacrifice and the next morning she's dead?
ZIEGLER
That was a coincidence.  An amazing coincidence, perhaps but a genuine coincidence, nonetheless.  Bill, please believe me, nothing happened to her that hadn't happened before.
ZIEGLER
She got a lot of attention, that was certainly true, but nothing she didn't want.  And later, when my people left her at the hotel, they said everything was absolutely okay. 
What then happened in her room, she did to herself, as she had done many times before.  But, sadly, this would be the last time.  She OD'd on crack, like the papers said.  No chance for foul play.  Her door was locked from the inside and the police had to break it down.  No, I'm afraid for her it was always going to be just a matter of time - you said as much yourself when she passed out in my bedroom at the Christmas party.
BILL My God, was that her?
ZIEGLER nods, yes.
Several moments of strained silence go by.
Then ZIEGLER stands up with a comfortable end-of-conversationsigh.
ZIEGLER
So, Bill, I hope you understand why
I thought it was important to tidy this up.  But now I think all the dishes are washed and put away. 
Nobody killed anybody.  Someone died. 
That's sad.  But life goes on.  It always does.  Until it doesn't. Okay?
INT. BILL'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
Bill quietly enters and goes to his study to undress, as he did the night before. He enters the bedroom as quietly as possible.
He hears ALICE breathing softly and regularly and sees the outline of her head on the pillow.
Unexpectedly, his heart is filled with a feeling of tenderness and even of security. Then he notices something dark quite near ALICE'S face.
It has definite outlines like the shadowy features of a human face, and it is lying on his pillow.
For a moment his heart stops beating, but an instant later he sees what it is, and stretching out his hand, picks up the MASK he had worn the night before.
V.O. He thought he must have dropped it in the morning when he packed the costume away, and Alice had found it and placed it on the pillow beside her, as though it signified his face, the face of a husband who had become an enigma to her.  All at once he reaches the end of his
strength.Clutching the mask, he utters a loud and painful sob - quite unexpectedly - and sinks down beside the bed, buries his head in the pillows, and cries.  A minute later he feels a soft hand caressing his hair.
He looks into ALICE'S worried eyes.
BILL I will tell you everything.
ALICE raises her hand, as if to stop him, but he takes it and holds it.
BILL No, I will tell you everything.
BEDROOM - IT IS NOW DAWN The grey light creeps through the curtains.
ALICE sits expressionlessly at a small table near the window, finishing a cigarette.  A full ashtray next to her.
BILL sits miserably on the edge of the bed staring at the carpet... He sighs and looks at Alice.
She smiles at him sadly and reaches out her hand.
He gets up slowly and goes over to her.
BILL What are we going to do now?
She gazes into his eyes.
ALICE
I think we should both be grateful that we have come unharmed out of all our adventures, whether they were real or only a dream.
BILL kneels down in front of her.
BILL Are you really sure of that?
She takes his hands in hers and looks at them.
ALICE
Only as sure as I am that the reality of one night, let alone that of a whole lifetime, is not the whole truth.
BILL And no dream is entirely a dream.
She presses his head to her breast.
ALICE
But I think we're awake now..  And for a long time to come.
BILL Forever.
Almost before he finishes the word, ALICE lays her fingers on his lips.
ALICE
(whispers as if to herself)
We should never look into the future.
They kiss tenderly and lie down on the bed, dozing a little, dreamlessly, close to one another - until with the usual noises from the street, and a victorious ray of sunlight through the opening of the curtain, there is a knock on the door and their seven-year-old daughter, HELENA, runs into the room and, laughing, jumps into their bed.  And a new day begins.
THE END
