HOAG

You realize this has to be
 
removed.

(as Archer
slowly nods)
Then here we go, Commander.
Through the Looking Glass...


INT. SURGICAL BAY - NIGHT

Unconscious, Archer is wheeled into the surgical bay, Castor beside him. Hoag turns to the video technician.

HOAG

Make sure you get everything --
I'll need to study the tape before

the reverse surgery.

Hoag lowers an aerated Plexiglas mask over Archer's face.

Interwoven with integrated laser circuitry -- this Derma-
Induction-Device (D.I.D.) attaches via suction.

Hoag sights through the optical memory, squeezes the trigger. A cobalt beam cuts around the face -- cleanly slicing it. Then Hoag lifts Archer's face -- off of his skull.

Brodie and Miller watch from above. Tito stumbles into the nearby bathroom to throw up.

Hoag inspects Archer's face, then turns to his nurse.

HOAG

Vault it.

Hoag turns to perform the same procedure on Castor.

Castor's consistent EEG reading suddenly spikes radically -- for a moment, it almost seems to stabilize. Hoag glances over -- too late -- the spikes have disappeared.

But the CAMERA CLOSES IN ON Castor's ear -- and we sense that, somehow, his auditory nerves might be functioning.

DISSOLVE TO:


INT. RECOVERY ROOM - DAY

A head swathed in gauze. The bandages start to fall away.
 
Tito, Miller and Brodie wait as Hoag removes the gauze.

The patient looks into a mirror.

Jon Archer has become Castor Troy.

he touches his new face. Archer stares... the cold reality chilling his blood.

Archer buckles -- unprepared emotionally for what he's done to himself. For a moment, he seems to teeter on madness.

TITO

Jon -- are you all right?

Archer can't respond... he's somewhere the others can't comprehend. Finally he emerges... shaken, but in control.

TITO enters.	Instinctively, he grabs for his holster.

ARCHER

Okay... I'm okay.
(realizes)
But my voice... I still sound like
me.

HOAG

I implanted a micro-chip onto your
larynx.

Hoag SWITCHES ON an AUDIO TAPE. Archer repeats Castor's words as Hoag adjusts the chip with a wavelength box.

CASTOR (V.O.)	ARCHER
 

Okay, I've got a confession to make, but you aren't gonna like it... (etc.)
 


Okay, I've got a confession to make, but you aren't gonna like it... (etc.)

 

After a few repetitions, Archer's voice matches perfectly.

Archer yawns, squints and furrows his brow -- testing every muscle. He stares into the mirror -- into the eyes of his most hated enemy -- now his eyes. Archer slowly turns to...

Castor. Motionless, swathed, dead to the world -- but something about Castor's smile -- that mocking smile...

ARCHER
 
Now what?

TITO

We're down to 72 hours.	Let's
call Lazarro.	Castor Troy just
came out of his coma.


EXT. FBI HELIPORT - DAY

Armed agents take their positions around a helipad. A jet-black helicopter drops from the sky like an angry wasp.


EXT. HELIPAD - DAY

As Lazarro watches -- Tito escorts out a heavily-manacled "Castor." Two armed agents leap from the chopper and take charge of "Castor." He follows them pliantly, until --

TITO
Watch this hard-case -- he'll bite
your nuts off if he gets the
chance!

Archer gets the message. He starts to resist the agents and must be muscled into the chopper. He's manacled down.

Eye contact between Archer and Tito -- both aware of this very real point of departure. The CHOPPER DOOR SLAMS SHUT. It lifts off like a twister and SCREAMS away.


EXT. HELIPORT - STAGING AREA - DAY

The watching team breaks up, wanders back to work.

LOOMIS
What a week for Archer to go on a
training op.	Maybe we should try
to contact him.

WANDA

Forget it.	He's knee-deep in
Georgia swamp by now.

They pass Brodie and Miller, who watch the chopper disappear over the horizon. So far so good.
 

INT. CHOPPER - FLYING - DAY

The agent re-checks Archer's chains.

ARCHER

Don't forget -- I ordered a kosher
meal...

The agent smashes his elbow into Archer's gut. The second agent presses an INJECTOR against Archer's leg. PSSSST. Archer spasms against the drug -- then sags unconscious.


INT. EREWHON PRISON - DELOUSING CUBICLE

Archer wakes up as a torrent of delousing spray hits him.

A guard holds a water cannon on the newest inmate.

Archer lies gasping on the steel floor, protecting his face. The spray stops -- when head guard "RED" WALTON enters.

WALTON

You are now an Erewhon inmate -- a
citizen of nowhere.	Human rights
zealots, the Geneva convention and
the P.C. police have no authority

here.	You have no right...
(slaps on latex gloves)
When I say your ass belongs to me
-- I mean it.	Bend over.

Archer's face reflects the degradation as he bends over and exposes all to the cavity-searching Guard.

Satisfied, Walton lets Archer dress. Another guard places a pair of odd-looking steel boots before Archer.

WALTON

Step into them.

Archer inspects the lock-down boots. Hinged steel collars hook over the shoe and encase the ankle. The soles are gridded steel with magnetic inserts.

WALTON

Don't sniff 'em, you perv.	Just
step into them.
 

Archer obeys. A guard squats down and locks the steel collars over Archer's shoes. He tries to move -- but can't.

ARCHER

They're too tight.

WALTON

So's a noose.	Now keep your mouth
shut.

Walton JOLTS Archer with his HIGH-VOLTAGE SHOCK-STICK.

WALTON

The prison's one big magnetic

field.	The boots'll tell us where
you are -- every second of the
day.
(into comm-link)
201 to Population.

Walton presses his thumb into a standard FBI scan-pad.
It forms a print -- positively identifying the guard.
The heavy blast-door automatically opens.

WALTON

I've got fifty bucks says you're
dead by dinner.	Don't disappoint
me.

Walton prods Archer toward the door. To Archer's surprise -- he can now move.


INT. GENERAL POPULATION - DAY

The inmates eat. Silence descends as Archer enters -- intensifying the constant HUMMING of the MAGNETIC FIELD. Huge Dubov does a slow burn on seeing "Castor."

Scanning the room for Pollux -- Archer takes a seat next to a LITTLE, GOATEED MAN with a French accent.

LITTLE MAN

Hey, Castor -- remember me?

ARCHER

Fabrice Voisine... sure, I --
(catches himself)

--	I believe Jon Archer busted you for poisoning five members of the the Canadian parliament?
 

VOISINE (LITTLE MAN)

Those scumbags should never have
voted against the Quebecois.
(a beat)
We heard you got wasted.

Archer sees the other inmates sizing him up.

ARCHER
Do I look wasted -- asshole?

Voisine shakes his head "no" -- then his eyes widen as...

WHAM.	Dubov leaps onto Archer and starts pummeling him.

They slide across the table -- spilling everyone's lunch.

GUARD

(into comm-unit)
Central.	I have a disturbance in
population.	Go to lock down --

WALTON
(into comm-unit)
Hold that lock down.

Walton watches as Dubov throws Archer across the room. Archer staggers to his feet -- and sees the encircling inmates and guards looking at him -- unimpressed.

Especially his "brother" Pollux -- who watches uncertainly.

Dubov attacks again -- but Archer is ready. He grabs Dubov's fist -- just before it hits his face.

ARCHER

Never -- in -- the -- face.

Holding Dubov's fist firmly, Archer kicks Dubov repeatedly in the groin. Metal boot meeting soft flesh.

Dubov staggers back -- hurt. Archer moves in for the kill, savoring it.

Walton looks skyward.

WALTON
Lock 'em down.

INTERCUT WITH:
 

UP ABOVE - CENTRAL SECURITY

The prison's nerve center -- with video-feeds and monitors designed to keep problems and privacy to a minimum.

The two deputies react to Walton's call. Identifying Archer and Dubov's signature-blips -- they throw the appropriate switches and...

ZAP! The magnetic boots lock both inmates to the floor. Dubov flails hopelessly -- but Archer's just out of reach.

Crack!	Walton punches Archer in the diaphragm.

ARCHER

What?	He started it!

Walton smashes Archer harder -- he hits the floor.

ARCHER
When I get out of here --

WALTON

You'll what?

ARCHER
I'm going to have you fired.

His statement is so ludicrous, Walton laughs. Everyone does. From the inmates' reactions, Archer knows he's been accepted.

WALTON

(to Dubov)
That's two strikes, Dubov.	One
more and you know where you're
going.
(to the others)
Back to your 'suites' -- or no

dinner.

As Archer drops into the line of cons -- he spots Pollux waiting for him. Girding himself for this first encounter -- he's got a plan.

POLLUX

Hey, bro...

ARCHER
 
-- Pollux?

POLLUX

Of course it's Pollux, what the
fuck's wrong with you?

Archer stares -- feigning confusion until Walton prods him forward. Pollux watches his "brother" go -- very concerned.


INT. ARCHER'S CELL - NIGHT

Archer lies on his cot -- staring at the ceiling. Isolated, lonely, he realizes how easy it would be to go insane here.


EXT. HOAG INSTITUTE - NIGHT

An insanely starry night. Van Gogh's night. The night he cut off his ear, anyway.


INT. SURGICAL BAY - NIGHT

Castor's body lies inert. His life-support MACHINES BLIPPING away. Until the EEG spikes. Once -- twice -- three times. Brain wave activity increases -- and stabilizes.

Castor's fingers twitch. Then his fist clenches -- hard. Castor's head is swathed in gauze. But his eyes pop open.

Reflexively, Castor wrenches from the bed -- tearing out the tubes and wires that tether him to life support. He goes down -- in agony -- groaning.

He struggles to his feet -- staggering through the lab -- until he catches the reflection of his bandaged face in the window. He quickly unwraps the gauze.

The discarded bandages fall at his feet... we don't see what CASTOR sees -- but we hear him MOAN... then CHOKE...

then SCREAM -- the only moment Castor ever loses his cool.

Finally composing himself -- Castor's hand grips the phone and he dials.

CASTOR
 
Lars... okay, Lunt, then.

(rifling desk
documents)
Something really fucked-up
happened... I'm in trouble... so
listen very carefully...


EXT. HOAG INSTITUTE - NIGHT (LATER)

A RANGE ROVER SCREECHES up. At gunpoint, Lars and Lunt manhandle Hoag into the lab.


INT. SURGICAL BAY - NIGHT

Lars and Lunt hustle Hoag in. The lab is on. The screens run -- scrolling through the video log of Archer's surgery.

Hoag sees his terrified assistants -- bound with duct tape.

HOAG

What's this about?	What do you
want?

Lars shoves Hoag into a towering figure... we ZOOM IN ON Hoag's glasses. And THROUGH the REFLECTION we see...


MAN WITHOUT FACE

Hoag reacts in horror at the raw muscle, cartilage and bone. The man lifts a cigarette to his lips... then exhales.

CASTOR

What do you think I want?


INT. PRISON - POPULATION - DAY

A huge wall-screen plays gentle nature scenes. Below -- the inmates engage in their exercise hour.

Voisine stares at the screen -- while Pollux carefully watches his "brother" play basketball. Archer tosses up an air-ball to the jeers of other inmates.

POLLUX

You realize, of course, that
 
magnetic humming is designed to

drive us insane.	If we all don't
get brain tumors first.

VOISINE

And that same cloying Bambi tape
-- over and over...

POLLUX

It's like they're begging us to
riot.	Where the fuck are we,
anyway?
(the game ends)
Gotta go...

Pollux trots over to Archer -- passes him his cigarette.
He studies Archer as he takes a drag -- and nearly gags.

POLLUX

... I'm worried about you.

ARCHER

Why?

POLLUX

Your jumpshot has no arc.	You
used to swagger... now you swish.
You're gumming that butt like a
Catholic school girl.
(notices)

And why do you keep picking at
your finger?

Pollux has caught Archer reflexively tugging at his phantom wedding ring. Archer immediately stops. He takes a drag and holds it -- then exhales right in Pollux's face.

ARCHER

I was in a coma...

Pollux sticks his finger under Archer's eye and pulls down like a vet examining a sick dog. Archer pushes him off.

ARCHER

My reflexes, my senses, my
memory... everything's jumbled.	I
can't even tell you why Dubov
jumped me yesterday.

POLLUX
 
You Pollinated his wife the day he

was arrested.	How could forget
that?

ARCHER

I've forgotten plenty.	Look
around -- we've screwed over half
the freaks in here.	What's gonna
happen to us if they think I've
lost it?

Pollux contemplates the other inmates -- circling, sizing up the brothers like hungry sharks. Instinctively, Pollux moves closer to Archer for protection.

ARCHER
I need you to play big brother for
once -- till I can fill in a few
blanks.	Think you can handle
that?

Pollux nods grimly -- then Archer pulls up his sleeve, exposing the pyramid tattoo.

ARCHER

I know I got this on my tenth
birthday.	I just can't remember
why.

POLLUX

Man -- that was the worst day of
our lives!

Archer feigns a "struggle" with his memory. He lights a new butt with the old -- chain-style... then "remembers."

ARCHER

Oh, God -- Mom O-D'd at County
General.

POLLUX
Retching and convulsing while
those bastards didn't even try to
save her sorry ass.	You gave her
mouth to mouth -- man -- even then
you had some constitution.
(a beat)
Remember what you swore to me at
the funeral?

ARCHER

Uh -- to kill the doctors?
 

POLLUX

After that.	You promised you'd
always take care of me.

ARCHER

And I bet I kept that promise...

POLLUX

Only one you've never broken.

Pollux curls into Archer -- in need of comfort. Archer puts an affectionate arm around Pollux -- springing the trap.

ARCHER
Screw the past.	We've got the
future to look forward to.
(a beat)
We still have tomorrow.

POLLUX

No shit... five million bucks...
now those Red Militia crackpots
get to keep it.

ARCHER

That's not the worst part.

POLLUX

What's worse than losing five
million bucks?

ARCHER

Being stuck in this rat-hole when
it blows.	What you built was a
work of art.	It belongs in the
Smithsonian.

Pollux beams with pride -- Archer hangs on every word.

POLLUX

Yeah -- well... the L.A.
Convention Center will have to
do...

ARCHER

Thanks, Pollux.

POLLUX

'Thanks'?	I guess they really did
fuck you up.
 

Then Archer smiles -- like Jon Archer. Without knowing exactly why -- a wave of ill-ease overtakes Pollux.


INT. ARCHER'S CELL - DAY

Archer paces impatiently... as the door rolls open.
Walton is looking at him with cool respect.

WALTON

You have a visitor.

Archer smiles to himself -- pleased at Brodie's timeliness.


INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - DAY

Archer's boots lock down -- as the guillotine door rises.
But his confidence evaporates into unspeakable horror.

Because he finds himself staring into the blue eyes of --

Jon Archer.	This man has Archer's face -- his real face.

IMPOSTOR

What's the matter?	Don't you like
the new me?

Archer studies the image of his former self -- trying to understand. Then he recognizes the smirk on the face, the mocking twinkle in the eyes and he says what he cannot say...

ARCHER
-- Castor...?

CASTOR

Not anymore.

ARCHER
It can't be.	It's impossible.

CASTOR

I believe the phrase Dr. Hoag used
was 'titanically remote'.	Who
knows?	Maybe the trauma of having
my face cut off pulled me out.	Or
maybe God really is on my side
after all.
(starts pacing)
By the way, I know you don't get
 
the papers in here.

Continuing to circle, he displays the current LA Times:

"INFERNO AT HOAG INSTITUTE -- Malcolm Hoag Dead"

CASTOR

Terrible tragedy.
Hoag was such a genius -- but
selfish with his artistry.	I
actually had to torture his
assistants to convince him to
perform the same surgery on me.

ARCHER

You killed them?

CASTOR

Of course I killed them, you dumb
fuck.	Hoag, his staff...

FLASH ON Hoag's body -- on the floor of the burning lab.
Two more burned bodies adjoin Hoag's.

CASTOR

Miller and Brodie --

FLASH ON Brodie and Miller -- dead in a mangled car wreck.

CASTOR

I even paid a visit to your buddy
Tito.

ARCHER
He doesn't know anything about
this!

CASTOR

Come on, Jon.	I think I know you
better than that.	I only wish you
could have been there to see the

look on his face --

FLASH ON Tito... he smiles, then recoils in shock as Castor lifts a pistol and shoots him... then he picks up Archer's wedding band off the counter...


INT. EREWHON PRISON (PRESENT)

Archer stares -- thunderstruck -- at the wedding band now
 
on Castor's finger.

CASTOR

--	then again, I guess you were there.

(a beat)

I torched every shred of evidence that proves who you are. So swallow this -- you are going to be in here for the rest of your life.

ARCHER

Castor, don't do this --

CASTOR
No discussion, Jon -- no deals.
Now if you'll excuse me, I've got
an important government job to
abuse, and a beautiful wife to
fuck.	Excuse me -- I mean 'make
love to.'

Archer freaks out. He screams, flails -- unable to reach Castor. Castor opens the door and guards rush in -- clubbing Archer and shocking him senseless.

WALTON

Sorry, sir.

CASTOR

It's quite all right.	You never
know what to expect from a
psychopathic criminal...


INT. CELL BLOCK - DAY

The guards dump Archer into his cell.

WALTON
Better be nice, Castor.	You could
get mighty lonely now that Pollux
is gone.

ARCHER

Pollux is -- what?

WALTON

Archer cut him a deal for turning
state's evidence.	He's been
released...
 

ARCHER

Walton, you have to listen to me
-- right now!

WALTON

Or what?	You'll have me fired?
(pushes a button)
You're confined until I say
otherwise...

The steel panels shut - silencing Archer's pleading voice.


INT. ARCHER'S CAR - MOVING - DAY

Sipping a beer, Castor cruises past the suburban bliss:
men on hammocks; women chatting; kids playing tag.

CASTOR

(sickened)
Jesus, what a life.

Castor tries to catch a street address and rolls past...


ARCHER'S HOUSE

Dressed for work, Eve watches blandly as the car goes by.
A moment later, it backs up and parks.

Hiding the beer can, Castor forces a sheepish smile -- and gets out. She doesn't smile back.

EVE

I suppose it was only a matter of
time before you forgot where we
lived.

CASTOR
Sorry -- the job's been murder
lately.

Castor looks her over -- she's much sexier than he expected.

EVE
So what happened to your
'important' assignment?

CASTOR
 
What do you know about it?

EVE

I know exactly what you always
tell me:	Absolutely nothing.

CASTOR

It didn't work out the way
everyone thought it would.	Where
are you off to?

EVE

I've got surgery.

CASTOR

Surgery -- are you okay?

Then he spots her medical bag.	Oops.

EVE

Don't try to charm me -- I'm still
angry.	There're leftovers in the
fridge.

CASTOR

Have fun at work.

Castor kisses her good-bye -- on the mouth.

EVE

What is with you?

CASTOR

Don't I usually kiss my wife?

EVE

No.

Castor reacts as she gets in the car and pulls out.


INT. ARCHER'S HOUSE - DAY

Castor steps inside, looks around.

CASTOR

What a dump.


INT. STUDY - DAY

Castor sifts through Christmas cards from holidays past,
 

studying the ones with photos. He's memorizing -- matching names to faces -- Wanda's, Buzz's, Lazarro's, etc.

Something else catches his eye. He finds a floral notebook -- Eve's diary -- and pages through it. Then, he reads:

CASTOR

'... "Date-night" has been a
typical failure... we haven't made
love in almost two months...'
What a loser ...

Castor hears a voice. Glancing across the hall, he sees...


GLIMPSES OF JAMIE

As she walks back and forth in her room, talking on the phone -- and wearing only panties and a cropped T-shirt. Castor steps closer -- enjoying the view.

CASTOR

The plot thickens.


INT. JAMIE'S ROOM - DAY

Jamie stamps out her cigarette.

JAMIE

--	I got your E-mail, Karl. That poem was really sweet --

(spots Castor at door)

Hang on a sec...

She slams it -- but he gets his foot inside.

JAMIE

I'll call you back.
(to Castor)
You're not respecting my
boundaries.

CASTOR
I'm coming in, Janie.

Castor pushes menacingly into the room.
 
JAMIE

'Janie'?

Castor spots her correct name embroidered on a pillow. He gazes seductively -- unnerving Jamie as he steps toward her.

CASTOR

I don't think you heard me...
Jamie... You have something I
want ...

He reaches for her -- and right past her. He picks up a pack of cigarettes from the desk.

JAMIE
Clarissa left those here.

CASTOR

(shrugs and
lights up)
I won't tell mom if you don't.

JAMIE

When did you start smoking?

CASTOR

You'll be seeing a lot of changes
around here --
(blows a perfect

smoke ring)
Daddy's a new man.

Jamie stares, astonished, as Castor goes out.


INT. EREWHON PRISON - ARCHER'S CELL

Fists bloody, voice hoarse, Archer pounds at the cell door. Exhausted, he finally stops -- staring at the face of his enemy in the mirrored door -- the enemy who now has total command of his life.


INT. FBI - LOBBY CHECKPOINT - DAY

Castor dons his stern "Archer" face as the gate guard checks his thumbprint ID. He's cleared and waved in.


INT. FBI INTERROGATION BOOTH - DAY
 
Buzz and Wanda watch Pollux through the two-way mirror.

He's gorging himself on a big lunch.	Castor arrives.

BUZZ
Listen, sir... we just want you to
know...

WANDA

We're all really sorry about
Tito...

CASTOR

Yeah, well, shit happens.

Buzz and Wanda exchange a glance. To them, "Archer" is just avoiding his feelings again.

CASTOR

How's our star witness?

BUZZ

He hasn't told us a damn thing
except what kind of mustard he
likes on his tongue sandwiches.

WANDA

If that bomb is out there -- we're
almost out of time.

LAZARRO (O.S.)

Archer!

Lazarro stomps toward them... furious. Buzz and Wanda quickly excuse themselves.

LAZARRO

You made a deal with Pollux Troy?
He's 'a manipulative psychopath.'
Your own words, Jon!

CASTOR
Just let me do my job, Victor.

LAZARRO

The job I've been protecting for
the last eight years.	From now
on, you go strictly by the book.
Everything gets cleared by me.
Understand?

Lazarro stomps off. Castor watches him go, wheels turning.
 


INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - DAY

Castor enters -- shutting down the mikes... and the blinds.

CASTOR

You're supposed to be snitching --
making me look good.

POLLUX

'Look good'?
(drops food in
disgust)

Seeing that face -- I want to
vomit.

CASTOR

I'm the one who has to look at
this butt-ugly mug every time I
pass a mirror.	Look at my eyes,
my chin, my perfect nose -- gone!
(considers his
reflection)
Archer took my life, so I'm taking
his.	Bro, I'm going straight.

POLLUX
Sounds like they took your brain,
too?

CASTOR

Imagine Dillinger as J. Edgar
Hoover.	Carlos the Jackal running
Interpol.	Kaddafi heading the
Mossad.	Think of the secrets we
could sell...

Pollux listens carefully -- mind clicking like an abacus.

POLLUX

The drug agents we could expose.
The movie stars we could
blackmail!

CASTOR

That's just the bottom of the food
chain.	Pollux -- what would
happen if somebody planted a bomb
on Air Force One?
 
POLLUX

... that somebody would get rich.
And, I suppose, the nation would
be pretty pissed-off.

CASTOR

Pissed-off, vulnerable... looking
for someone to step in, take
charge, give them hope again.
What if that someone was an F.B.I.
hero?	A true Boy Scout and family
man -- with a spotless past.
Imagine where that guy could land
-- if the timing's right.

POLLUX
It's an audacious dream, Caz.	But
Jon Archer is hardly a household
name.

CASTOR

Not yet he isn't.	But after you
'confess' -- you'll be a free man.
And I'll be on my way...


EXT. CONVENTION CENTER - DAY

Police VEHICLES ROAR into position. Squads of police evacuate throngs of people.


INT. CONVENTION CENTER - SUB-BASEMENT - EXTREME CLOSEUP - BOMB TIMER - DAY

TICKS down to less than two minutes.

Working as a unit, the BOMB SQUAD carefully remove the bomb's casing. Inside, the complex guts glow evilly. The men are tense, cautious -- and way out of their league.

BOMB LEADER

Jesus... Any suggestions?

TECHNICIAN

Yeah... run

Castor pushes up his blast visor.	He looks grim.

BOMB LEADER

It's protected by a vibration
 
detector... One touch and...

CASTOR

Evacuate your team, Captain.

BOMB LEADER

Sir, you can't disarm it --

CASTOR

Just go!

The bomb squad hustles out. Waiting until he's alone, Castor pulls a radio device from his pocket and hits its switch. The bomb's glow dies instantly.


EXTREME CLOSEUP - TIMER

stops at 26 seconds.


BACK TO SCENE

Not satisfied, Castor starts it up again -- running the timer down to four seconds. That's better.


INT. EREWHON PRISON - "POPULATION" - DAY

The inmates eat lunch. Walton enters -- prodding a beaten Jon Archer ahead of him.

WALTON

A special privilege today:	TV --
by order of Agent Jon Archer of
the F.B.I...

Jeers from the inmates as the big screen changes from the nature loop to... CNN.


ON SCREEN - CONVENTION CENTER

"Sweating," Castor lumbers out, carrying the disarmed bomb.

ANCHORMAN (V.O.)

That was the scene at the L.A.
Convention Center, where an F.B.I.
agent is being hailed as a hero.
Agent Jon Archer disarmed a
powerful bomb just seconds before
 
it was set to explode.	Let's get

the latest from Valerie Rice...


EXT. CONVENTION CENTER - DAY

Castor basks in the attention of the gathered media.

REPORTER RICE

The apparent target was a group of
Supreme Court justices -- due to
speak here today.
(thrusting microphone)
Mr. Archer, do you have any idea
who planted it?

CASTOR

That's classified.	But if he's
listening I have a message for
him:
(directly into
camera)
Nice try.	Now you know who's
really in charge.


INT. EREWHON PRISON - POPULATION

Watching the TV, Archer's enraged, frustrated. Then his eyes focus... he watches closely as --

A guard uses his "thumbprint ID" to get through the security door. Archer's eyes fall on the thumbprint scan pad.


INT. FBI - BULLPEN - DAY

Castor gets a "thumbs up" from some co-workers, others smile -- but they know better than to applaud.

CASTOR

Don't you guys watch TV?	Where's
the parade?

They look at each other -- afraid. But proud rookie Loomis starts clapping, so everyone else joins in rousing applause.

CASTOR

--	Loomis, Buzz, uh -- Wanda...
all of you, thanks from the bottom
 
of my heart.	Thanks for enduring

all those years I was an
insufferable boor.	From now on --
consider me reborn.

WANDA

Stop the presses -- Jon Archer
found a personality...

Wild applause... interrupted by an excited Kim.

KIM

Sir... the White House is calling.

Castor acts startled... as if at a loss. Then he struts toward his office -- pausing only to give Kim a playful swat on the rump. She's stunned.


INT. ARCHER'S OFFICE - DAY

Castor surveys his new domain. He settles into Archer's big leather chair... sees a framed photo of Archer and family. He apes Archer's dumb posed smile...

CASTOR

Jon, your career is finally taking
of.
(picks up phone)
Archer.	Sure I'll hold...

Waiting, he picks up a handbook: You and the FBI: A Primer for New Employees. Then...

CASTOR
Mr. President, what an honor...

Castor pumps a "whacking off" gesture with his hand.


EXT. ARCHER'S HOME - DAY

Castor, carrying grocery bags, comes into the back yard where Jamie practices free throws. He watches her miss.

CASTOR

How about a game of horse?

JAMIE

Don't make me beat your butt
again, Dad.	It's harmful to my
developing psyche.
 

CASTOR

Afraid you'll lose?

Castor crisply sinks a free-throw. Jamie glares, takes the ball -- and tosses an air-ball.

CASTOR
'H.'

Jamie sneers at him.	He buries another one.

CASTOR

Try putting a higher arc on the
ball... and square your shoulders

to the basket.

Begrudgingly, she listens -- and sinks a clean shot.
Pleased, she nods.	HONK!	A BMW pulls into the driveway.

JAMIE

Gotta go.	Karl's here.

Jamie trots over to greet KARL (17) -- a clean-cut preppie. Opening the car door dor her, Karl waves, smiling at Castor. Castor studies Karl carefully, not liking what he sees.


INT. ARCHER'S HOME - NIGHT

A tired Eve opens the door. It's pitch black inside. As she fumbles for the light switch...


MATCH

flares as Castor lights a candle. The dining room table is set for a candlelight dinner. He smiles warmly at her confusion.

CASTOR

Don't tell me you forgot.	Eve --
it's date night!


DINING ROOM - LATER

Eve looks up from her pasta.	After an awkward silence.

EVE

Why do I feel like I'm on a blind
 
date?

CASTOR

It's important to keep some
mystery... so things stay...
unpredictable.

Eve studies him as he pours her more wine. Her smile slowly fades as she realizes what's going on.

EVE

'Unpredictable'?	You're about as
unpredictable as the tide.
(detached)
How long are you going to be gone

this time?

CASTOR

Gone?

EVE

Isn't that what all this is about?
The wine, cooking me dinner --
your next assignment?

CASTOR

I'm not going anywhere.

EVE
You always say that -- then you
leave.

CASTOR

I bet I deserved that.	I bet Jon
Archer is the most inattentive,
sexless spouse on Earth.

EVE

Jon, that's not true --

CASTOR
Of course it's true, but I'm
trying to change?	I'm here
because I want to be alone with
you.	I want to see the candle-
light dance in your beautiful --

Uh-oh. Castor can't tell the color of Eve's eyes. He leans in "romantically" -- but we know the real reason.

CASTOR

-- brown eyes.
 

He smells her hair, then her shoulders, her skin. She's aroused, but wary. So Castor goes in for the kill.

CASTOR

I wanted it all to be just
right... when I told you about my
promotion.

EVE
Your what?

CASTOR

Well, I don't have it yet.	But
Lazarro's getting old -- he won't

be around forever.	And I'm
getting the itch to move up.

EVE

Jon... that's wonderful.

CASTOR

So you see, I'm not going
anywhere.	Unless it's upstairs
with you...


INT. BATHROOM - NIGHT

Castor carries Eve into the shower and spins on the water.

He rips her blouse open -- on her like a vulture to carrion. As they drop to the floor of the stall -- water filling up around them -- Castor licks her ear and whispers...

CASTOR

baby, it's like I'm having you for
the first time.

Dirty water runs down a floor drain... PULL BACK to:


INT. EREWHON PRISON - POPULATION - NIGHT

Desolate, Archer mops down the rec area.

ARCHER

Don't they ever let us take off
these boots?
 
VOISINE

Not unless you're sent to the
'Clinic.'

ARCHER

You mean if I get sick?

VOISINE

They don't give two fucks about
your health.	The Clinic's where
they send the real hard-cases for
attitude adjustment.	Dubov just
got sent down -- and look at
Wainwright --

Voisine gestures to a dazed inmate nearby -- WAINWRIGHT -- who sits in a corner -- gnawing at his knuckles.

VOISINE

Toughest bastard I ever saw --
after you, of course.	Now he's a
fucking drool case.

ARCHER

What did he do?

VOISINE

He hit a guard.

Archer sees Walton hovering nearby. Archer heads for him.

WALTON

Looking for trouble, Castor?

ARCHER

As a matter of fact -- yes.

Crack!	Archer decks Walton.


INT. PRISON - POPULATION - NIGHT

Walton and a guard herd Archer toward a steel door.


INT. "CLINIC" - NIGHT

Archer is dumped on the floor. He sees he's lying in a puddle of something. He looks up -- and recoils.

ARCHER'S POV - DUBOV
 

is strapped to a vertical gurney -- post-procedure. His limbs are stiff, his eyes blank as a mako shark's. But his feet are bare -- bootless.

MED-TECH

Where's the mop, he puked all over
the place.

An assistant unstraps Dubov and drops him on a gurney.

MED-TECH

(mopping up)

--	next time, bring them in before dinner...

Archer cases the place: Above is a catwalk... leading out.


BACK TO SCENE

Walton muscles Archer into the gurney. The Med-Tech smirks.

MED-TECH

Oh happy day -- Castor Troy.

The Med-Tech wheels the ECT head-gear cart into place: twin needle-like BOLTS ready to fit into ARCHER'S ears. A single blue static spark jumps from the bolts.

Walton roughly wedges Archer's head into the head gear, shoving the chewed-up bite strap into Archer's mouth.

WALTON

Bite hard, scumbag, 'cause you'll
be gumming baby food from here on
out.

MED-TECH
Get his boots, Sergeant.

Walton unlocks Archer's first boot and pulls it off. As the Med-Tech starts to fasten Archer's arm -- Walton unlocks and pulls off the second boot.

Archer's feet are free. Crack! He yanks his foot up hard -- Walton reels back, stunned.

One arm still restrained, Archer backrolls in the gurney and kicks the head-gear cart away -- knocking it into the
 
Med-Tech who collapses onto it, hitting "Test" --

ZAP! The HEAD-BOLTS FIRE, catching the Med-Tech through the shoulder -- he drops to the floor, his synapses shot.

Seeing that Archer is still restrained by the arm -- the assistant darts out of the room.

As Archer pulls free -- Walton looms over him -- gun poised.

Then -- wham! Dubov wallops Walton -- using his boots as brass knuckles. The head guard collapses.

Dubov smiles dumbly at Archer -- all trace of vendetta now obliterated. Archer nods gratefully -- they're on the same team... at least for now.

Suddenly the ALARM BLARES.

Archer sees guards charging the room. He tries closing the door -- but the guards arrive. Dubov lumbers over and puts his massive weight into it -- and slams the door shut.

O.S., guards POUND at the now-locked door.

Archer quickly frisks Walton -- coming up with a cigarette lighter. he pockets it.

Scanning around -- Archer leaps onto a mounted, hinged lamp. it swings against the wall. Archer uses it to reach the catwalk above.

ARCHER
Dubov -- come on!

Dubov obeys and follows Archer up onto the catwalk.

A groggy Walton muscles open the door from inside. Guards pour in. Walton grabs an AUTO-RIFLE and opens
FIRE.

SLUGS chase Archer and Dubov as they flee through the catwalk door.


INT. CENTRAL SECURITY CONTROL

Two guards watch Archer and Dubov disappear off the clinic's monitor. They grab their shock-sticks and rush for the door.
 

The door opens -- revealing Dubov and Archer. Perfectly in synch -- they double cold-cock the startled guards. Archer grabs a shock-stick -- and fuses the door shut.

He yanks out wires and shatters the computers. Dubov mimics the behavior -- ripping out an entire console -- and revealing a narrow cable duct.

Flames explode -- shorting the circuitry -- the DRONING HUM RISES -- the magnetic power monitor shows a dangerous surge.


AROUND PRISON

Chaos. Guards scatter as the huge diamond-vision SCREEN EXPLODES and inmates are flung like rag-dolls by their short-circuiting boots. Anything metallic flies into the magnetic domes.


SECURITY CENTRAL

As the men back through the cable duct -- Archer struggles to replace the heavy console.

The DOOR is BLOWN open.	Walton enters to find... no one.
Then his eyes light on the console -- slightly askew.


INT. CABLE CORRIDOR

Archer and Dubov rush down the tight corridor -- and around the bend. The corridor ends in a...


STORAGE/MAINTENANCE AREA

Lined with tools, toilets, sinks, a rack of old lock-down boots. They race through the far door...


INT. CENTRAL TOWER ROOM

Archer and Dubov find themselves in a multi-level labyrinth. A hundred feet high -- criss-crossed with catwalks, staircases and high walls.

ECHOES resound -- SHOUTING, FOOTSTEPS GETTING CLOSER -- they seem to be coming from all around them.
 

Over the magnetic HUM -- Archer notices loose screws and other metal debris stuck to the sheer wall. He pulls one screw away -- and lets it fly back into the polarized wall.

Archer gets an idea -- and looks back the way they came.

SMASH CUT:


SHEER WALL

Archer and Dubov scale the face -- using the old metal boots. They climb higher and higher as...

Guards criss-cross the catwalks and staircases below and around them -- oblivious.

Archer and Dubov almost reach the next level when...

WALTON

There!

BULLETS SMACK the wall around them -- just as Archer and Dubov reach the next catwalk.

Archer spots the emergency exit security door at the far end. But four guards descend on them -- and block their way.

Fist fight as Archer and Dubov take on the attacking guards. Archer heaves one down the stairs -- into more guards. Dubov drops another over the catwalk.

They continue their desperate race for the door -- reaching the landing. As BULLETS PING around them -- hulking Dubov rips away a floor panel. He uses it as a shield as Archer sparks up Walton's lighter.

As SLUGS EXPLODE into the shield -- Archer places the flame to his thumb... and peels off the skin mold.

He presses his thumb to the door's keypad. To his horror, its LED reads "print unreadable."

Walton and guards movie in, FIRING at closer and closer range.

Dubov staggers under the FUSILLADE OF BULLETS. The shield is repeatedly punctured -- and is quickly disintegrating.
 

Archer licks his thumb, tries again. Finally it reads "Clearance Confirmed"... the door slides open.

ARCHER
Let's go!

Dubov heaves the shield at the encroaching guards -- but as he turns to follow... Walton BLOWS him away.

Archer reaches to pull Dubov through, but the riddled inmate ignores the helping hand. Pulling the door shut, he collapses in front of it -- blocking it momentarily.


INT. HIGH CATWALK TOWER

Archer hesitates for a moment... but that's all he has. he keeps going... up the winding staircase-catwalk -- higher and higher -- a step ahead of the onrushing guards.

As BULLETS CLANG around him -- Archer reaches the top.
He ignores a sign which reads...

EMERGENCY EXIT ONLY
SAFETY LINES REQUIRED

He charges straight up a ladder and plows right through --

SMASH CUT:

EXT. PRISON - DAWN

Archer's blinded -- it's daytime in the real world.

A sea gull flies across his face -- as we FOLLOW the bird...

PULL WAY, WAY BACK to reveal:

The prison's in the middle of the goddamn ocean, in what appears to be just an abandoned, rusty oil rig platform.

Archer rushes over to a transport chopper.


INSIDE COCKPIT

Archer searches for the keys. No go. He throws switches. Nothing works.
 

Guards pour out of the hatch -- FIRING. Archer leaps from the chopper and jumps over the side to the platform's --


LOWER LEVEL

He lands hard on the slanted, corrugated shed roof and rolls to the ground. He grabs a high-pressure hose -- and cranks the pressure valve -- as the pursuing guards close in.

Archer BLASTS the guards with the WATER CANNON -- knocking Walton and others into the sea. Archer upends a stack of oil barrels -- which roll into more guards. Archer spots:


TUGBOAT

pulling a Zodiac dinghy -- heading out to sea.

Archer jumps up a stack of pipes to the south rail -- where the end of a crane's hook is tagged back. Under FIRE -- Archer frees the hook, which swings away from the platform.

Hanging on to the hook, it swings him out over the ocean.
At the apex -- le lets go and plummets down into...


CHOPPY SEA

He pulls himself into the ZODIAC and frees it from the tug. It ROARS off.


EXT. ZODIAC - MOVING - DAY

The nylon craft zips through the waves -- approaching San Pedro Harbor. The ENGINE SPUTTERS... low on gas.

ARCHER

Come on... come on...

Archer senses something... He looks up and...

Whoosh! Something swoops down -- but it's just a pelican.

He FIDDLES with the ENGINE -- which finally DIES. Archer grabs the oars -- about to start rowing when --
 

Another swoop!	This time it's the prison chopper.

Archer spots a string of buoys dotting the harbor. An idea.


WIDE SHOT

The chopper settles over the Zodiac.

Wind and water swirl around Archer...


CHOPPER

Walton, drenched but obviously rescued, has archer in his sights... He starts to FIRE his MACHINE GUNS...


ZODIAC

BULLETS RAIN down on the boat -- destroying it -- as Archer dives into the rolling swells...


INSIDE CHOPPER

Walton RAKES the debris -- shredding it.

The chopper does a final circle of the wreckage... then moves off... its ROTOR WASH THRASHING the buoy.


UNDER BUOY

Archer has crawled up into the hollow buoy -- sucking air.


INT. ARCHER HOME - BEDROOM - DAY

Eve's asleep. Castor, dressed, looks down at her like Cortez at Montezuma -- triumphant, with overwhelming power.


EXT. DRIVEWAY - DAY

Heading for the car, Castor is about to light up when --

EVE
 
Last night, I thought -- this

isn't my husband.

He pockets the smoke.	Eve is there, dressed somberly.

EVE

Then I woke up in the middle of
the night -- and found you passed
out in the study.

CASTOR

I couldn't sleep -- you roll
around a lot.
(jingles car keys)
Anyway, I'm late.

EVE

Jon, you know what day it is.	I
know it's difficult for you, but
we still have to go.

CASTOR

Can't we skip it just this once?
I gotta 'protect and serve', you
know.

EVE

'Protect and serve' later.	You're
going.

CASTOR

Okay, if you insist.	But -- you
drive.

He climbs into the front seat beside her.


INT./EXT. CAR - MOVING - DAY

A pastoral, hilly area near the coast.

CASTOR

So who's this Karl creep Jamie's
been seeing?	He's a little old
for her, isn't he?

EVE

I don't know... they're about the
same ages we were when we met.
(smiles)
Remember the all-night dentist?
 
CASTOR

Sure, how could I forget.
(changes subject)
By the way, you never said
anything about last night...

He moves closer, stroking her hair as his BEEPER sounds.

EVE

Aren't you going to get that?

He turns his beeper off, then touches her lips with his finger. Without knowing exactly why, Eve tenses up.

EVE

Jon -- this is hardly the time or
place.

Castor looks around in surprise because he sees she's driving into --


SPRAWLING MEMORIAL PARK

They drive through the gates -- passing a church marked "ST. MARY'S-BY-THE-SEA." Nearby, the OCEAN ROARS.
