FADE IN:

EXT. VINCI COUNTRYSIDE - RENAISSANCE - DAY

Beneath a jawdroppingly storybook castle, a small Renaissance Fair with florid awnings, demented ACROBATS and roaring puppets is unfolding.

RUSTIC FARMERS and their families rumble with enjoyment at the Sabbath afternoon entertainment.

Encircled by children, A JUGGLER WITH AN UNFORGETTABLY ETCHED FACE elegantly plucks the red balls from a pouch on his mule. As he begins to juggle, a LOUD EXPLOSION is heard, causing him to ungracefully drop his balls and collapse in a heap.
 
Everyone at the fair, including the puppets, looks up.

UNFORGETTABLE JUGGLER

Leonardo, che pazzo.

The juggler shakes his fist up to a swish pan that swings up toward a smoking window of the awesome castle...

INT. ROOM OF THE GOLD MACHINE

where the charismatic LEONARDO DA VINCI laughs down at him. Da Vinci wears a pair of very early, very cool sun-glasses with his trademark beard.

He turns and loses his smile, something extraordinary reflecting off his glasses. Removing his shades, Da Vinci moves to the Something, a gloriously incredible machine. The opening CREDITS REVEAL its dazzling idio-syncrasies.

TWO COUGHING APPRENTICES haplessly try to disperse smoke from the still billowing, mysteriously spectacular Machine. Mirrors attached to parts of it reflect beams of light which cut through the smoke like a Renaissance laser show.

DA VINCI

(silencing authority)
Basta vapore.

The apprentice throws a lever. A shunt near the furnace turns. Steam escapes upwards. The machine immediately slows down. Da Vinci oh-so-gently coughs and moves for-ward with tongs.

A LITTLE TROUGH - IN THE MACHINE'S INNARDS

comes to a trembling, mystical halt. Right behind this trough is a CONPLEX POLYHEDRON CRYSTAL as intricately modulated as any Rubik stocking stuffer, but much more dazzling in beauty. It gleams like a jewel in the yellow glow which pours from a PLEASANTLY GRINNING DEMONHEAD into a trough--a glow of heat--and something more than heat.

The tongs enter the frame.

Da Vinci brings the object closer to his face. A murmur goes up from the awestruck apprentices as the Master peers at the smoking yellow bar.

APPRENTICE TWO

Maestro, che meraviglia!
 

APPRENTICE THREE

Lei e' proprio fantastico!

Da Vinci's pride goes dead as the implications hit.

DA VINCI

Lasciatemi, solo.	Solo!

The apprentices scurry out. Mind reeling, Da Vinci turns his back to the viewer, before a wall of frescoes.

DA VINCI

L'ho fatto.

Spinning back around, using the edge of his cloak, Da Vinci pulls out the large gleaming crystal with a pop.

INT. DA VINCI'S WORKSHOP

With an accompanying blast of smoke, Da Vinci bursts through some double doors into his workshop, sadly reflecting upon the crystal in one hand and the tonged bar in the other.

His workshop is a spendiferously enigmatic blend of laboratory and studio; On a table in the foreground is a fresh clay equestrian statue; a large VOLUME of sketches, the inkwell nearby; a MODEL of what looks like a HELICOPTER; Da Vinci flings the tonged bar on the table among these goodies.

Pocketing the crystal, Da Vinci meanders through his work-shop casually tinkering with various experiments. He snaps his fingers at a BATHING SUITED APPRENTICE, wearing a diving helmet prototype. The Apprentice jumps into a pool of water.

Leonardo next stops at an easel displaying a finished-except-for-the-mouth portrait of Mona Lisa, who happens to be seated in a stool before the easel. She broadly smiles, revealing the worst dental work of her epoch. Da Vinci shakes his head and moves out onto a

EXT. CASTLE TERRACE

A FLYING APPRENTICE sails past Leonardo in a bat winged glider, enthusiastically shouting. Da Vinci grins back until he touches his pocket. He pulls out the crystal and, after a beat, angrily twists it apart into two separate, geometric pieces revealing a small intricate mirror. He quickly folds the surprisingly shapable
 
geometric pieces.

Calming down, Da Vinci looks from the three components of the crystal to each of the three unfinished works on the table in his workshop. He ponders then looks back out to the Vinci vista.

The bat winged glider DISSOLVES into:

A HAWK

who is revealed to be flying over Sing Sing prison.

INT. A SING SING PRISON CELL

The shadow of the hawk passes through a cell window, over the face of EDDIE HUDSON HAWKINS causing him to break out of an eye-closed trance.

Before the viewer can get a good look at him, Hudson Hawk turns to an oddball version of the "Mona Lisa" that has his face and tears it off the cell back-wall.

INT. PRISON BLOCK WALKWAY

TWO PRISON GUARDS, One WISE and BLACK, the other YOUNG and GREEN march down a cell block. The Former is smoking a pipe which the Young Guard lights with a lighter.

WISE GUARD

We're losing our biggest celebrity
today.

YOUNG GUARD

You're kidding, Petey the Paint
Thinner Killer is getting paroled?

WISE GUARD

Not that slime, you Fizzhead.
Hudson Hawk.	The last of the
great cat burglars.

INT. PRISON CELL WALL

A hand tears down a picture of a happy Hudson Hawk and a LITTLE MONKEY, identically dressed in black cat burglar gear.

THE BLOCK

The Wise Guard and the Young Guard rumble forward.
 
WISE GUARD

As a thief, Hawk was a poem.
Iambic fucking pentameter.	You
know, Crime used to have a little
class.	A hundred reporters were
here when he came in, now they're
probably out covering some tired
crack gang war...

The Guards approach Hawk's cell. Hawk, with his back turned, hefts on a nifty blazer.

HAWK

Remind me to fire my publicist.

The Wise Guard chuckles as the Young Guard fumbles with his key-ring.

YOUNG GUARD

Darn, these are for L-block...

Hawk's hand reaches through the bars and grabs a pipe cleaner from the Wise Guard's pocket. Then the lighter from the Young Guard's pocket--BURNS OFF the fabric fuzz with the lighter beside it--bends the now blackened wire--and with a quick turn of the wrist uses it to UNLOCK the door.

YOUNG GUARD
- go back down to security and-

He stops, dumbfounded, as the door clunks open. The Guards double-take as Hawk, finally in full view, struts past them, down the hall. The Guards hustle to catch up. The wise guard puts his finger in the air and sarcastically pretends to be stung by the heat emanating from Hawk.

WISE GUARD

Guess this means, Hawk, you'll
be able to let yourself back in...

HAWK

Never happen.	Bet.	Ten bucks.

Hawk and the Wise Guard hit fists, half-smiling. Hawk unfolds the painting.

HAWK

Oh, give this back to Petey in A
block.	Tell him it was a sweet
gift, but I think he got some
 
wrong ideas about our friendship.

YOUNG GUARD

The Paint Thinner Killer did
this?	I think you picked a good
day to get out...

The trio comes to the final checkpoint. Hawk takes a deep breath.

WISE GUARD

Hope I lose the bet.	Have that
cappuccino on me.

HAWK

(flipping him the
pipe cleaner)
You got it.	A double.

EXT. OUTSIDE THE PRISON--DAY

Hawk strides to the Massive Sliding Concrete Door/Wall between him and freedom. As music crescendos and

Hawk glows his first smile, the door opens to reveal two Mafioso brothers, CESAR and ANTONY MARIO, the latter sitting upon the hood of a tinted window Lincoln Continental. Cesar is of cool, hair-slicked-back attitude, his scumbag brother is not.

ANTONY

Welcome back, buddy ol' pal.
We've got a proposition...

HAWK

Answer's no, not even if you
bathe.	Cesar Mario, Antony Mario,
how's the "Family?"	Kill any
monkeys lately?

CESAR

How many times do I have to say
it?	I didn't put the hit on

Little Eddie... Never had anything
against that kooky chimp.	I
actually found him, "endearing."

HAWK

Sure.	Face down.	Two endearing
shots to the back of the head.
That's your mark, man.	What did
Little Eddie ever do to...
 

Smouldering, Hawk struts off. Cesar takes a black canvas bag from a SCARFACED DRIVER and hustles up to Hawk. The Lincoln rumbles behind them, Antony riding on the hood.

CESAR

You're hitting Rutherford's
Auction House.	Easy as my
brother's wife.	Directions are
in the bag.	Just open the seventh
floor safe and take out the
thingie...

HAWK

Or you cut off my thingie.

Directions even your brother
would understand.

ANTONY

(defensively)
Yeah, directions even I could
understand.

The car squeals to a stop. Antony bounds off. Cesar shove-throws the canvas bag into Hawk's unwilling hands.

CESAR

Hawk, you're a great thief.	Got
set up, did some time, nothing to

be ashamed of.	Don't give me a
sonata about you always just
really wanted to settle down,
open a hardware Store and sell
spatulas...

HAWK

If the Mario brothers weren't
Jersey's third largest family,
I'd say kiss my ass.	But
considering your status, I'll
say slurp my butt.

Hawk fiercely push-shoves the canvas bag back into Cesar's hands.

CESAR

What's your favorite sport, Hawk?

HAWK

Baseball, why?
 

Antony opens the back door of the Lincoln and says "Baseball." He is handed a baseball bat. Hawk backs up as Antony moves threateningly toward him.

HAWK

I meant, ping pong.	Listen, I'd
rather go back in than whore for
you...
(stopping)
Oh, I need to borrow ten dollars.

A PRISON GUARD from above turns as not to be a witness.
Hawk feebly calls up to him.

HAWK

Help?	Police?

Antony swings at Hawk, who pretends not to notice until the last second. Hawk ducks and slam-kicks his calf. Antony crumples, using the bat as a crutch. Hawk boots up the bat for a two-handed catch then savagely pivots it across Antony's face, knocking him into the backseat of the car.

CESAR

(unfazed)
You need some time to think.
That's cool, but next time, I'm
not going to say "Please."

Cesar floats into the backseat.	The Lincoln takes off.
Hawk seethes...

HAWK

I don't believe this.	I've been
out forty seconds...

A BACKFIRE rings out. Hawk hits the ground, thinking it is a gunshot.

HAWK'S ON THE GROUND P.O.V.

A gasping 1960 Caddy comes to a stop and a pair of a too-fancy-to-be-tasteful shoes comes out. Hawk looks up to see ALEX MESSINA, his older, maybe-maybe-not-wiser best friend.

ALEX
That's the first thing I did.
Smooch the ground and taste the
freedom.	Sorry I was late.	Miss
anything?
 

HAWK

(getting up)
Your timing, and your shoes, are
impeccable...	Good to see you,
Alex, been having a lousy day.

ALEX

Lousy day?	The man's getting out
of prison and he's having a
lousy day.	What, you missing out
on the Cell Block Water Ballet
pageant?	Believe me, it's
overrated.

Hawk pauses to say something, then just hugs Alex.

ALEX

Where's the kiss?	No tongue this
time, I promise.

A laughing Hawk gives Alex's stomach a slap before
getting in the car....

HAWK

Looks like you've been expanding
your...

ALEX
Don't say it, Hawkins.	I'm
incredibly sensitive about my
fucking figure.

HAWK

My next word was gonna be
"consciousness."	Swear to God...
tubby.

EXT. THE ROAD INTO HOBOKEN--DAY

The Caddy thunders past a sweet Manhattan view. "Come

Fly With Me" is playing on the radio. Hawk casually com-pletes an intimidating hand puzzle.

HAWK

That's your definition of "Hard?"

ALEX
Show off.	Hey, boss tune.	"Come
Fly with Me."

HAWK
 
Three minutes, 51 seconds.

ALEX

Still do the puzzles, still know
the running times of songs, and
I'll bet you're still the best
damn cat burg--

HAWK

Not anymore.	Now I'm the laziest
damn cat burg--I'm going to take
it so straight that I won't tape
a Mets game without the expressed
written consent of the National
Baseball League.

ALEX

Now that you're born again,what
do you wanna do?	Statue of
Liberty?	Entertain some ladies?
Miss Saigon tix?	Seduce some
women?	Play Nintendo?	Bone some
chicks?

HAWK

Come on, Alex, let's just get to
Alex's.	Your bar's the only
place that's going to cheer me.
God, I'd kill for a damn
cappuccino.	What the hell's a
Nintendo?

ALEX

Oh man, you still got a thing for
those unmasculine European coffees?
Who's your buddy?

Alex pulls a styrofoam cup from a paper bag.

HAWK

The man knows, the man knows!

Hawk takes off the cap with a stimulating whiff.

ALEX

So Mr. Coffee, what went down
outside the prison?

HAWK

Oh, not much.	Mario Brothers want
me to do a job.
 

Alex brakes and cappuccino flies. Hawk half-heartedly tries to lick up with his fingers.

ALEX
Those dago-guinea-I can say
this shit I'm Italian-wop
motherfu--

HAWK

Ah, had the perfect amount of
foam.	Just get me to the bar...
It's the one good thing in my
life that'll never change....

EXT. OUTSIDE ALEX'S BAR--NIGHT

The Guys move through the personably Jersey face of the bar. The Empire State Building beams in the background. Sinatra cuts off.

INT. ALEX'S BAR--NIGHT

It's changed. Hawk and Alex enter into what has become the ultimate pseudo-art deco-fern littered-nightmare, packed with noisy, INSUFFERABLY SELF-ABSORBED YUPS.

A violently erotic and pretentious video plays upon elevated T.V. sets set up all around the place.

Hawk's mouth gapes as he drifts by a sickening COUPLE toasting wine coolers, and two very YOUNG BROKERS high-fiving each other after missing a dartboard.

ALEX

I didn't know how to tell you.	A
couple brokers stopped in for
Stoley Spritzers one night.	Next
thing I know Fast Track Digest
votes us "Watering Hole of the
Month."	Now, I'm shopping for
Aqua Salmon wallpaper.

HAWK

I read about these people in
Newsweek.	Where's all the
regulars, Crazy Jeff Cava, the
Todd sisters, Indian Joe?	Where's
Ed Kranepool's autograph?	Captain
Bob's steering wheel?

ALEX

Hey, get this irritable guy a
cappuccino.	I gotta go be a boss.
 

Alex lifts a piece of the bar and moves behind it.
Snatching up a menu, Hawk calls out...

HAWK

This is Pizza?	Reindeer Goat
cheese?	I admit, I've been known
to go wild and order a Canadian
Bacon in my time, but..

Hawk lights up a cigarette. A TORTOISE SHELL NON-SMOKER immediately turns to him wearing a "Yes, I mind if you smoke" button.

TORTOISE SHELL NON-SMOKER

Can you read.... smoker?

HAWK

Can you take a sunrise and
sprinkle it with dew?

TORTOISE SHELL NON-SMOKER

(Huh?)
No.

HAWK

The Candy Man can, Felix.	You
know, I thought this was a country
where you could do any stupid
thing you wanted; drive to work

naked, make love to a V.C.R.
Guess I'm wrong.	Maybe that's
why I became a serial arsonist.

TORTOISE SHELL NON-SMOKER Hey, it's okay, big guy. Smoke

all you want.	Have mine....

The Non-smoker fumbles out a pack of cigarettes and flees. A cappuccino in cup and saucer slides down the bar saloon-style. A smiling Hawk picks it up, turns away from the bar and closes his eyes, bringing the cup to his lips until a POLICE BADGE swirls into frame and splashes into the cup, splattering coffee over Hawk's blazer.

GATES (O.S.)

You're under arrest...

Hawk makes eye contact up to a crude, coarse, and cackling island of a man, OFFICER GATES, amid the sea of oblivious and self-obsessed yuppitude, standing by a table.
 

GATES

Have a seat.	Good to see you,
buddy ol' pal...

HAWK

The pleasure's all yours, Officer
Gates.

BACK OF THE BAR

With concern, Alex watches Hawk sit at Gates' table.

GATES' TABLE

Gates pillages a plate of spaghetti and meatballs with terrifying precision. Hawk tosses the badge onto the food. Gates eats around it.

GATES

Why do you show your parole
officer such disrespect?
Especially after I got you such
a nice job.

HAWK

What job?

Gates pulls up the black canvas bag and puts it on the table.

GATES

The auction house, asshole.	One
night's work and you're free like
no ex-con's ever been.	No
checking in with a shrink, no
community service teaching
retards how to play air hockey.
It's a great deal, I can't lie.

HAWK
The only thing you can't do is
get sex for free.	I know I was
in prison for like basically the
80's, but, call me daffy, aren't
you supposed to stop me from
committing crimes.	You know,
Book-em-Dano, Call-for-backup,
Give-a-Hoot-Don't-Pollute.

Gates thunders out of his chair and moves around to sneer down at Hawk. Behind Gates, on the T.V. screens, are
 
analogous images of DISGUSTING ANIMALS AND MONSTERS.

GATES

You wouldn't be out if it wasn't
for me!	I did dog and pony for
you!	You think they would have
let you out after what you did,
you told the board members they
looked like the Three Stooges...

HAWK

How was I supposed to know they
were women?	Besides one of them
was bald and kept saying
"Soitinly."

Gates simmers into his seat with a self-control smile.

GATES

Remember that guy in the cell
next to you who hung himself?

HAWK
Yes.

GATES

Remember that shoe you lost...

HAWK
Uh, yeah.	Cut to the chase.

Gates pulls up a shoe and puts it on the table.

GATES

One phone call and your shoe
will become a piece of evidence
and that suicide'll become a
murder.

Hawk bobs under the table and up.

HAWK

What else do you got under there
... I don't want to be rude, but
this is all pretty lame.

GATES

That's the beauty.	It's bullshit,
but I can make it stick because
I'm a good guy parole officer and
you re a bad guy who's about to
find out that there's a thin line
 
between ex-con and escape con.

Alex suddenly approaches the table.

ALEX

How is everything tonight, sir?

GATES

Beat it, Alex.	You're a dinosaur.

HAWK

Alex, did you know this ape was
going to be here...

ALEX

Sure.	That's why his meatballs
are made out of marinated Chuck
Wagon.

GATES

(mouthful)
You're full of shit.

As Alex speaks, an eating dog is on the screens.

ALEX

No, man, actually you are.	Just
add water and it makes its own
gravy.	Keeps your teeth healthy
and your coat shiny.

Gates grabs the shoes and races off, gagging. Hawk gets up to laugh next to Alex. Their laughter dies as they turn to look at the black canvas bag left on the table between them.

INT. BACK ROOM--DAWN

Hawk stares mournfully at a black and white photo of a monkey-sized chalk-outline on a city street. Behind him, Alex pulls out blueprints from the black bag. Sinatra's "Witchcraft" blares on the radio....

ALEX

Hmmmm.....

HAWK

Yo Pandora, quit hummm-ing... look
at this.

Hawk is rummaging through stockpiled remnants of an old, "true" bar. Round lamps, tacky mirrors, pictures of Hawk
 

and the Regs at the bar. Managing a weary smile, Hawk lifts a ship steering wheel, while Alex puts on a pair of granny classes and pulls out blueprints.

HAWK

It's Captain Bob's steering wheel!
Remember when the Captain.....

ALEX

Hmmm, nasty little safe on the 7th.

Hawk nervously picks up a Rubik's Cube and holds it behind his back. He brings it back around, completed. Sighing, Hawk drops the cube and rubs his scalp. Alex starts rubbing his stomach. They pace in pre-job syncopation and speak rapid-fire.

HAWK

The safe's a Simpson 71.	Last
time I played the game, Simpson
only had a 40.

ALEX
Just means it'll take you an extra
31 seconds to seduce.	You re
still the best, I know it.

HAWK

But you got three guards who...
Shit, what am I doing?	Where's

the want ads?	Gonna sell some
spatulas.

ALEX

Hey, I'm sorry, man.	I'm putting
out a fire with kerosene.

Alex gives Hawk a consoling two-hand-shake then jumps back to reveal he has put Hawk into thumbcuffs.

HAWK
This isn't funny.	I'm not into
this.	I...

ALEX

There goes five seconds...My
record's eighteen.

HAWK

You're not...LISTENING!

Out of annoyance, Hawk breaks out of the cuffs and
 

violently throws them at Alex, who sits down a little wounded.

HAWK
I'm sorr--Goddamn Mario Brothers.
Goddamn Gates.	Goddamn Rutherford
Auction House.	By the way, how
many seconds?

ALEX
Rutherford Auction... that name...

Alex jumps up excitedly and then convulses in pain.

HAWK

Alex!

ALEX

Don't wet your diapers.	I'll have
to change them.	"Witchcraft."
What's the running time?

Alex flops down behind a work table before a wallfull of drawings of different kinds of vaults. He sets himself up for an insulin injection.

HAWK

3:48.	I can't get you involved,
man.	This is my sewage and...
(re drawings)

God, you love all this, don't you,
you bastard.	Haven't you ever
heard of stamp collecting, or
curling?

Hawk leans in and administers the shot of insulin to Alex.

ALEX

I'm in.	Have you seen the public
service announcements for Diabetes.
We can ride horses, play LaCrosse,

and knock off auction houses.	I
got a plan.	You won't have to hail
Cesar or Gates.

Hawk collapses next to Alex, resigned to his fate.

HAWK

I'm a bum.

EXT. NICE, BUSINESS NEIGHBORHOOD--NIGHT
 

TWO GRUBBY DERELICTS, one pushing a shopping cart, the other inside it, situated atop the usual two Glad bags. They are drunkenly warbling "Witchcraft." IMPECCABLY DRESSED NIGHT-LIFERS give them a wide berth.

Our derelicts pass beneath a MASSIVE RED CANOPY of a distinguished eight story edifice, upon which is written RUTHERFORD'S AUCTION HOUSE. A DOORMAN shoos them away...

A NEWSPAPER TRUCK pulls up in front of the Auction House. The Driver pops out with a bundle of papers and moves to a Dispenser on the corner. The Bums wheel around the truck. The Driver loads the papers and bounds back.

The Truck pulls away from the corner. The shopping cart rolls off--the bums nowhere to be seen.

The Truck turns the corner, revealing the derelicts climbing up the back of it, with Glad bags around their necks. The Truck moves toward an enclosed Walkway Bridge that connects the Auction House with another Building.

Launching low-tech grapples, the Vagrants latch them-selves onto the Walkway window as the Truck passes beneath.

AT THE WINDOW

The viewer's viewpoint moves into a tighter view of the dangling derelicts, revealing them to, of course, be Hawk and Alex. Getting a footing, on the small window ledge, each man cuts a hole in the window while holding onto a plunger.

HAWK

Whoa, you better cut a bigger hole
than that.

ALEX

Hey, you promised......Don't worry,
I'm wearing my girdle.

INT. INSIDE THE WALKWAY WINDOW--NIGHT

Hawk and Alex come through their window holes. Hawk immediately flattens himself against a wall, whisper-ing...

HAWK

Cameras?
 
ALEX

No need.	Guards' station's right
there.

Alex points to an open doorway just down the hall where laughter and shadows emerge. Hawk tries to flee, but a grinning Alex pulls him toward it.

Hawk and Alex slide across the wall to a closed room marked POWER, which is right next to the open Guards' Station. The viewer's viewpoint moves past Hawk and Alex lock-picking into the Power room to...

INT. THE GUARDS' STATION

Two Security Guards sit before a console of seven security screens still chuckling over an unheard joke. Wires coming out of the security console run across the floor and through the wall into...

INT. THE POWER ROOM

The wires go up to a row of seven humming, RECORD button flashing V.C.R.s. Hawk and Alex stand before them, sharing a cig.

ALEX

They record everything their
video surveillance takes in...

HAWK

Yes, master-thief, I can see that.
You said something about a plan...

Alex presses the REWIND buttons on the V.C.R.'s.

ALEX

Am I boring you, smartass?	Watch.
A little rewind and re-wire action
and the Guards are going to be
watching a rerun and miss out on
our exciting episode.

Alex pulls from a nearby shelf six tapes marked MONDAY.

INT. SEVENTH FLOOR AUCTION AUDITORIUM--NIGHT

Moving beneath a video camera and a dazzling Set of Hanging Horse Mobiles, a Heavyset guard, BIG STAN, moseys through the dimly lit main auction house auditorium. The auditorium chairs are strewn out in the middle beside a turbo Floor Washer.
 

Next to a painting of Happy Children Riding Horses at the back of the auditorium stage, Big Stan hefts himself upon a comparatively TINY BLUE CHAIR and begins to tip back and snooze.

INT. GUARDS' STATION

The Security Guards look to the seventh floor screen to see an unfolding shot of Big Stan mid-snooze.

SECURITY GUARD ONE

Check out Big Stan...
(walkie-talkie)
Big Stan!

THE AUCTION AUDITORIUM

Startled by his walkie-talkie, Big Stan falls back on the little chair, crunching it to the ground.

THE FIRST FLOOR

The laughing security guards see the crunch.

INT. THE POWER ROOM

Alex puts the last of the Monday tapes into a V.C.R.

ALEX

You got about five minutes and
change.

HAWK

5:32.	"Swinging on a Star."

ALEX

You know they invented something
while you were inside.	Called a
watch.

A freight elevator pings. Hawk opens it up as the music of "Swinging on the Star" kicks in on the soundtrack.

HAWK

"A mule is an animal with long
funny ears."

ALEX

"He kicks up at anything he
hears.
 

Hawk crams himself into the freight elevator with his Glad bag. Strenuously upbeat Ray Conniffesque singers continue to sing the song, orchestrally accompanied, when Hawk isn't.

INT. THE FREIGHT ELEVATOR

Hawk takes over the song, sardined in the elevator.

HAWK
"Or would you rather swing on a
star, carry moonbeams home in a
jar."

POWER ROOM

Alex goes up to a Circuit Box and pulls down two large Switches. The soundtrack singers continue to warble.

THE GUARDS' STATION

The lights of the floor wobble and die. The console screens blink off. The Security Guards stop laughing.

SECURITY GUARD TWO

Hell-o.	Check the Power room,
bud...

Security Guard One harrumphs into a standing position...

POWER ROOM

Alex speedily hooks and rehooks the backs of the V.C.R.S.
They now all have their PLAY buttons lit up.

ALEX

swing on a star, carry moonbeams...

OUTSIDE THE POWER ROOM

Security Guard One fishes for keys to open the power room. The soundtrack singers whisper as not to give away Alex.

INSIDE THE POWER ROOM

Alex briskly slams back up the switches.

OUTSIDE THE POWER ROOM

The singers go louder as the lights come back on. Security Guard One harrumphs and heads back to the
 
Guards' Station.

THE AUCTION AUDITORIUM

Hawk scrambles out of the freight elevator in the left wall of the Auditorium, glancing to the clock.

HAWK

"Or would you rather be a fish?"

He pulls out the black canvas bag from his Glad bag and takes out the blueprints. Hawk follows them toward the painting on-stage.

THE GUARDS' STATION

Big Stan comes up from behind his fellow guards, dumping the remains of the chair on the floor.

BIG STAN

(moving back off)
Very funny.

The Seventh Floor Screen shows a peaceful auction auditorium. And the Blue Chair.

THE AUCTION AUDITORIUM--CAMERA P.O.V.

From the exact angle, the viewer sees the current state of the room with Hawk flinging off the painting of the horseback children, revealing a safe. But no Blue chair.

HAWK

spits on the rubber cup of an electronic sensor, plugged into a Walkman, and affixes it to the safe above the dial.

HAWK

(lyric trouble)
"A fish is annuh nan na nan na
brook.

THE FREIGHT ELEVATOR

Alex is now packed into the freight elevator.

ALEX
"He can't write his name or read
a book.	To fool people is his
only thought."
 
THE AUCTION AUDITORIUM

HAWK

(remembering)
"And though he's slippery, he
still gets caught."

Wearing headphones, Hawk cranks up the Walkman and spins the dial. The CLICKS from the dial are so loud he winces and turns down the volume. Then there's a CLUNK.

THE GUARDS' STATION

With the soundtrack singers taking over, Guard Two sips a cup of coffee. He doesn't swallow.

His sights zero in on the Blue Chair on the seventh screen. He looks to the chair remains, then back again.

SECURITY GUARD TWO

Uh, Jerry.	I'm looking at the
seventh floor and I don't know
how to say this, I see the Blue
Chair.

SECURITY GUARD ONE

What the... You think that's weird,
check out screen two.....

Screen Two shows THE TWO SECURITY GUARDS THEMSELVES hatching open some on-duty beers, going down a hall. Guard Two looks to the empties atop the console....

SECURITY GUARD TWO

Somebody rewired the recorders!

AUCTION AUDITORIUM

Hawk ditches his accessories and swings the safe door open.

Inside the safe, along with the "holy" Da Vinci music cue, is the clay equestrian model from Leonardo's worktable.

Hawk belts out as he put it in the black canvas bag.

HAWK
"And all the monkeys aren't in
the zoo."

ALEX (V.O.)
 
"Every day you meet quite a few."

Alex gives Hawk a congratulatory pat.

HAWK AND ALEX

"So you see it's all up to you.
You can be better than you are.
You could be swinging on a star."

THE AUCTION ROOM

BIG STAN reconnects the wires of the seventh V.C.R.

THE GUARDS' STATION

Suddenly, on the seventh screen, the image and voices of Hawk and Alex in-process comes on.

SECURITY GUARD ONE

Shit, let's roll!

THE AUCTION AUDITORIUM

Hawk puts the painting back up, but stops to stare at the playful children.

ALEX

The song's over!	Come on!
"You could be swinging on a star."

HAWK

What am I doing here?	There are
so many things I wanna do that
aren't this.	Paint a lighthouse.
Kiss a woman in Italy.

ALEX

(more frantically)
"You could be swinging on a star."

HAWK
Paint a woman in a lighthou--I
don't want to steal a horse.
Life is...

Hawk's soliloquy is cut short as Security Guards One and Two crash into the auction auditorium.

ALEX
(DEADPAN)

"You could be swinging on a star."
You couldn't have waited to see
 
a psychiatrist.	No, you had...

Alex whips his chair at the floor washer, tipping it forward and causing its electrical cord to pull up and trip the Guards into a bellyflop.

Hawk bolts right at the bustling up guards and locks them into Alex's thumbcuffs. He then limbos under their connected arms and springs over the outstretched washer cord. The Security Guards clumsily turn and re-trip themselves.

HAWK

Let's go down the freight elevator.

Big Stan suddenly unhatches from the freight elevator.

ALEX

Keep those ideas coming.

Hawk and Alex run toward an office located at the right wall. They both do a Gene-Kellyesque-chair-tip-over before simultaneously bashing through the office door.

INT. DARKENED AUCTION AUDITORIUM OFFICE

Hawk and Alex stop in the office to painfully laugh and rub their funny bones. Alex stops laughing.

ALEX

I'm not as unpleasantly plump as
that Guard am I.

Big Stan fires off a warning shot. Hawk and Alex quickly tear up a window.

Moving out on to a ledge, Hawk and Alex look down to the huge auction house awning and trade gulps.

Big Stan wobbles into the mouth of the office door.

HAWK AND ALEX

I got a bad feeling....

HAWK

I can't even swim.

ALEX
Hell, the fall'll probably kill
ya...

Big Stan raises his gun.
 

Hawk and Alex jump and AAAGH down the face of the
building....

Closer and closer to the awning....

The viewer focuses upon Hawk as he free-falls......

CUT TO:

RIGHT INTO A LAZ-Y-BOY CHAIR

Hawk continues his "fall" into a ridiculously huge reclining chair. The foot stand swooshes out with a thump. A HAND pulls away the canvas bag with a cackle.

INT. GATES APARTMENT--LATE NIGHT

Hawk's weirdly reclining viewpoint makes Gates and his pad more grotesque than they are (No small feat.)

A sub-Radio Shack stereo coughs next to a scary punch bowl of red, margarita-like substance, beneath the instantly recognizable framed picture of Those Dogs Playing Poker, all atop a Jungle Shag.

Gates, in shorts and a Hawaiian shirt-over-a-KEEP ON TRUCKIN'-T-shirt, raises a loud tumbler with one hand, the black canvas bag in the other.

GATES

Hudson Hawkins gets the chair of
honor.	How about a Gates-arita?
(toward bowl)
I used real hot dogs.

HAWK

Weren't you the bartender at
Jonestown?

Suddenly a light is turned on in the corner, revealing a seated Cesar and Antony Mario, the latter taking a painful Gatesirita sip.

CESAR

Good job, not pretty, but good.

HAWK

Ah, the mafia, the cops; do I know
how to party or what?

Gates pulls out the horse and looks at it.
 
GATES

All this trouble for a horsey.
I may not know art, but I know
what I like.

HAWK

(to Dog picture)
You certainly do.

GATES
So when's that Sebastian-Cabot-
Buckingham-Palace-looking-
Butlerhead getting here?

ALFRED

Any minute now, dear Mr. Gates.

A malevolently snobbish British Butler, ALFRED, enters in distaste. He makes a stressful glance to three VANITY FAIRS on a coffeetable that has a photo of a MAGNETIC HUSBAND-WIFE-DOG COMBO with the caption: MAYFLOWER POWER. Hawk notices this.

GATES

Oh, sorry Jeeves.	Gates-arita?

ALFRED

I'll pass.	May I?

Alfred takes the equestrian model and with a jeweler's loupe, studies it carefully.

ALFRED

Ah, such craftsmanship.	Leonardo
Da Vinci's last commission for the
Duke of Milan.	Irreplaceable.

GATES

Hey, Mr. French, I'm delirious
for you.	Now where's my cut?

With dignity, Alfred SMASHES the ancient horse over Gates's head. Alfred rummages through the debris REVEALING a perversely labyrinthine CRYSTAL PIECE. (recognizable from Da Vinci's workshop).

GATES

You son-of-a......I don't believe
this!	You come into my house!

Alfred pockets the goodies, but not before Hawk can give them a confused peruse.
 

GATES

I ought to take Big Ben and shove
it up your limey blimey bunghole!

A blade slides down Alfred's arm.	Half-yawning, he...

ALFRED'S 180 DEGREE POV

spins before Gates and the bystanders behind him.
THE BLADE goes back up Alfred's arm.

The room's only sound is the stereo's inappropriate music. Gates shrugs but his voice is off.

GATES
Like I said.	Where's my cu-u-...

Suddenly a line across Gates's neck turns red and blood begins to gush like a tourist attraction. Gates crashes down upon the table holding the punch bowl and the stereo, sending it to the ground, cutting off the music. The Dog Poker picture falls atop the carnage like a lid.

Blown away, Hawk tries to wiggle his way out of the recliner. Alfred pats some stain remover on the blood on his shirt.

ALFRED
So much for his "cut."
(post-chortle)
Excuse my dry British humor.

CESAR

(rising)
Lovely work, Alfred, taking the
Concorde back?

ALFRED

Indeed I am, Mr. Mario.	I'm
really racking up those frequent
flyer points...

HAWK

I hate to interrrupt you two
lovebirds...

ANTONY
You know, I think Gates promised
Hawk a cut, too....

The Mario brothers cackle out.	Hawk tries to flail out
 

of his chair. Alfred turns to him and flicks up his arm. Hawk sees his life pass before his eyes until he realizes Alfred is merely pulling him up off the chair.

ALFRED

Ta ta, Hudson Hawk.

HAWK

(breathless)
Too-do-loo, babe.

INT. ALEX'S RESTAURANT--DAWN

Hawk bursts into the bar. Alex sits on a stool, reading the paper.

ALEX

Did I miss anything?

HAWK

Oh, not much.	Gates just had his
tonsils taken out.	The hard way.

ALEX

Geez, Gates was killed.	Who do we
send the thank you note to?

Hawk does a combat jump over the bar and begins to fiddle with the cappuccino machine.

HAWK

The Butler did it. Guy was a cross between Alistair Cook and a Cuisinart. Dude took Mr. Ed and humptied dumptied it over Gates's head. He said it was made by, get this, Leonardo..


ALEX

(professorial)
Ah yes, a rare Renaissance piece.
Da Vinci's "Sforza," an equestrian

model of a never executed statue.
I consider it to be the prize of
tonight's auction of objets
d'equestrian.	Horse things.

The cappuccino machine sparks. A perplexed Hawk takes a couple extra seconds to back off.

HAWK

Okay, you got me, Mr. PBS.
 

ALEX

(holding up newspaper) Morning edition. Seems two thieves "attempted" to steal it last night, but thanks to three "courageous" guards, it will be ready for tonight.

HAWK

"Attempted."	At-tempt-ted!	I'm
not happy about having to steal
that horse, but I do have my
pride.	Face it, when it comes to
burglary, and sex, I....

Hawk takes the newspaper. There is a picture of the Three Security Guards in a cheery pose behind the "Sforza." Hawk squints to see that Security Guards One and Two are still wearing the thumbcuffs.

HAWK

Boing.	Uh, this I don t understand...

ALEX

Why try?

HAWK

(hurdling the bar)
Because I'm tired of not
understanding things.	Cops,

Mafia, and butlers forcing me to
bust my ass to steal something,
which it turns out I really didn't
steal--it's fucked up.

ALEX

(pulling back newspaper)
You re not thinking of going to...

HAWK

Alex, my man, it's time to play a
little offense.	Where's your tux?

INT. RUTHERFORD'S AUCTION HOUSE--NIGHT

Dressed in a not-quite-fitting but suave tuxedo, Hawk enters the now well-lit auction house auditorium (chairs all set out). Bored WORKMEN in coveralls lug equestrian items on to a podium from the familiar freight elevator.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER ...fan-taas-tic example of
 
Florentine marble... Who will start

at 160,000...160,000......180,000.

Someone raises their paddle as Hawk passes beneath the hanging horses and finds an aisle seat near the stage. Hawk scans everyone in the room before coming to the one seated next to him, AN ENCHANTINGLY BEAUTIFUL WOMAN.

HAWK

All these years of attending auctions, I still get goosebumps. The paintings, the sculptures....the things that aren't really paintings or sculptures...

THE WOMAN

.... the pretentious vultures who
don't even look up from their
calculators to see what they're
buying.	Now that gives me
goosebumps.	Auctions are
disgusting.

HAWK
I couldn't agree more.	Savages.

The Woman laughs at his gear switch then catches herself.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

Lot Fifteen, an equestrian sconce
attributed to the Cellini school..

AUCTION ENTRANCE

Big Stan, the hefty guard from the heist, enters the area wearing a blue ribbon.

AUCTION AREA

Big Stan is walking in back of the seated bidders: An oblivious Hawk in the foreground starts to scan VARIED BIDDER-TYPES, raising their paddles to babble out dollar figures; a GAUDY ROCK STAR and his GLOOMY-CHIC ENTOURAGE, A KING FAROUK-TYPE with a BORED TEENAGE AMERICAN HOOKER, and a scary NORDIC PRINCESS in a monocle and a tiara.

THREE STANDING ASSISTANTS frantically man a table of phones set up down before the stage. One raises his arm.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER Sold! To the caller from Newfoundland.
 

A STYLISH FEMALE ASSISTANT takes out an impressive replica of the "Sforza" from the safe behind the podium and brings it to the Auctioneer. The crowd a-a-hs... Hawk laughs and shakes his head.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUTIONEER

And finally, Lot number 17,
thought to be lost in the war,
and again last night, the Da
Vinci "Sforza," the jewel of the
sale.	Fan-taas-tic...

HAWK

(re: Auctioneer)

Is looking like a constipated
warthog a prerequisite to getting
a job in the art world?

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

There have naturally been questions
of its authenticity, so to verify
we have Doctor Anna Baragli of the
Vatican.	Doc?

ANNA

(rising, to Hawk)
Some of us warthogs are more
constipated than others.

Hawk uneasily laughs as Anna makes her way up the stage and pulls out a large magnifying glass. A look of distress passes over her face. Hawk closes his eyes in anticipation.

HAWK

Oh, the shit is going to hit the
fa--

ANNA

(suddenly serene)
Fantastic.	Perfection.	The

Vatican extends its jealousy to
the lucky bidder.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

We'll begin the bidding at 82.5
million dollars.	To you, sir.
Eighty-three, Ninety--your bid,
madame--Ninety point five.....

Hawk opens his eyes in confusion.	He scans Anna coming
 

off the stage, gliding toward the phone table. Hawk floats into the aisle, curling toward her as she picks up a phone and murmurs into it.

DARWIN MAYFLOWER

lOO million clams, Francesco!

The crowd orgasms as Vanity Fair cover boy, DARWIN MAYFLOWER works the aisle, playfully mussing up the appreciative, tiaraed Princess's hair, giddily high-fiving the Rock Star, and sloppily frenching the Hooker.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

100 million dollars to Mr. Darwin
Mayflower.

Hawk turns to gaze at the enigmatically familiar figure. Anna looks up from the phone to do the same. She swerves her attention to the back-turned Hawk.

Darwin moves to one of two reserved empty seats as his wife, Minerva, makes her entrance par excellahnce. She is outrageously dressed with a mammoth Tiffany watch that extends from her wrist down to, acting as a leash, her obnoxious little dog, BUNNY.
