MINERVA

Francesco, 100 million and one.

Darwin, to the crowd's delight, holds his struck heart.

DARWIN

Outbid by my own wench, quelle
bummere.

MINERVA

Poor baby..... Here, Bunny.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

Fan-taas-tic, the bid is at 100
million and one dollars.

Commencing a slow motion sequence, Big Stan comes out of the nearby office, zipping up his fly. He immedi-ately scopes Hawk in the space before the stage.

The Mayflowers lower themselves into their seats with devoured canary smiles.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

Go-ing!
 

Big Stan pulls out his gun, untheatrically, as not to cause a scene. Anna sees this and follows Big Stan's eyeline to Hawk.

Hawk turns to re-pursue but stops dead at the sight of the gloating Big Stan.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER

Go-ing!

Big Stan launches a gallop toward Hawk, who spins and veers back round up the aisle.

The Mayflowers zero their sights on the activity.

ECCENTRIC BALD AUCTIONEER
Gone!

The gavel comes down in super slow-motion.

Anna's leg pokes out of the aisle, tripping the guard.

Hawk brakes at the end of the Mayflower's row and smiles in relief, casually turning to Darwin and Minerva.

The gavel continues to come down in super slow-motion.

Both Darwin and Minerva Mayflower suddenly DUCK DOWN.

Smile vanishing, Hawk spins toward the stage.

The Gavel hits.

Breaking out of slow-motion into wide-angle, the entire podium explodes sending debris, equestrian pieces, and eccentric bald pieces searing into the screaming, battered crowd.

Knocked off his feet, Hawk gropes into a standing position. He sees the Mayflowers make a smooth exit. He starts to give chase until he sees a battered Anna rising from the ground.

A hanging white Tri-Star Pegasus, cracks from the damaged ceiling and swooshes down towards Anna.

Hawk bolts upon some auction chairs and makes a flying leap. He slams Anna out of the Pegasus's pulverizing Path. They weary up off the ground and move down the aisle, calm in a storm of packed art patrons.

ANNA
 
My God, that was bold of you,

you didn't have to do that...

HAWK
Forget about it--it was nothing--
anybody would have done the same
thing--It's an impulse...

ANNA

No, I meant you didn't have to
tackle me and rip my dress.	A
polite push, perhaps?	A clear
shout of "watch out, Anna"
would have done nicely...

HAWK
Excuse me, Milady.	I would have
flown over and carried you up to
a pink cloud, but I left my cape
at the cleaners.

Anna touches Hawk's lips and laughs.

ANNA

("Hey, I was kidding")
Thanks tough guy, thanks a lot.
Why was the guard chasing you?

HAWK
(Serious answer?
Na-a-h?)
Because Danger, Doc, is my middle...

Before Hawk can finish, a hanging horse out of nowhere hammers him into the ground and the viewer into darkness.

FADE IN:

INT. VAN-TYPE AMBULANCE--NIGHT

Hawk stirs into consciousness strapped on an elevated gurney.

HAWK

Saint Pete, hey I know, the whole
cat burglar thing, it sounds bad,
but I'll take the worst cloud you
got...

Hawk's eyes focus.	The Mario Brothers hover over him.
 
CESAR

News flash.	You're not in
heaven.	Yet.	30 seconds and
counting, if you know what I'm
saying.	Couldn't just play along,
could you...

EXT. THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE--NIGHT

The ambulance careens onto the Brooklyn Bridge.

INT. INSIDE THE AMBULANCE

Antony raises up a mammoth gun.

HAWK
Pretty class way of covering your
tracks.	I think that auctioneer
landed at La Guardia.

ANTONY

Subtlety was never one of our
strong points.

HAWK

Neither's flossing.

A confused Antony touches his teeth with his gun hand. Hawk escapes from one of his straps and launces a nearby trayful of syringes into Antony's face where they ghoul-ishly quiver. Antony fires a wild shot, shattering the partition.

FRONT SEAT OF THE AMBULANCE

The Scarfaced Bodyguard/Driver, now in paramedic white, freaks at the starred windshield.

THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE

The ambulance bumper-pools off some innocent cars.

INSIDE THE AMBULANCE

Hawk frantically tries to undo his other strap but a howling Cesar, side-stepping his vibrating-on-the-floor brother, latches onto the back of the gurney and wrenches it backward.

OUTSIDE BACK OF AMBULANCE

The elevated gurney blasts out the back with a now
 
unstrapped but terrified Hawk whoa-a-ing atop it.

The gurney wheels hit the road, sparking.

A sheet from the gurney, caught on the door, yanks TAUGHT --Hawk is "water skiing" on his stomach atop the elevated gurney!

Screeching cars are weirded out by the new vehicle on the road.

THE GURNEY

Battered by wind and fear, Hawk clutches to the gurney and the sheet with a grit teeth stoneface.

The sheet is torn from the gurney sending it rocketing off to the side on its own crazed volition.

Hawk skis toward a TOLL BOOTH WITH A LARGE GATE-ARM.

HAWK

Life don't get much better than
this.

He then sees he's heading toward an EXACT CHANGE lane.

Whizzing wildly forward on the gurney, Hawk scrambles into his pocket and wiggles out some change. He fran-tically winnows out some pennies and then maniacally FLINGS the change from twenty feet away.

TOLL BOOTH

The change ker-chunks into the basket and Hawk and the gurney JUST BARELY streak underneath the rising Gate-arm.

EXT. THE AMBULANCE

CRASHES through a gate-arm of another lane. Hawk and the still-wildly whooshing gurney cut it off.

FRONT SEAT OF THE AMBULANCE

Cesar pops his head through the partition.

CESAR

Make him into Roadkill!

Antony, seemingly oblivious to the syringes porcupined in his skull, pokes his head next to Cesar's.
 
ANTONY

Yeah, run him down!

Cesar and the Bodyguard/Driver turn to Antony and scream, then all three look out the windshield and scream.

THE AMBULANCE

jackknifes over a stopped car and somersaults into a fiery ball.

In the foreground, Hawk's gurney coasts down

A PEACEFUL OFF-ROAD

Hawk, with an unchanged expression of pure white knuckle fear, comes to a tranquil gurney-wheels-gently-squeaking stop.

Lit by the flames of the ambulance crash, a sneering young man in wire rim glasses emerges from the darkness, carrying a steel suitcase. He kneels before Hawk and opens the suitcase revealing a complex computer appara-tus. He begins mumbling into a cellular phone.

A malevolent, SILENT DEADPAN WRAITH passes him and approaches Hawk. Both men are dressed in outfits that seem to be a melange of fascist uniform and haute couture.

On the fingers of one Wraith hand is carved the word HATE. On the other hand is the word FROG. The Frog Hand hands a befuddled Hawk a card. It reads: MY NAME IS KIT
KAT AND THIS IS NOT A DREAM.

Hawk looks up with a "huh" expression as Kit Kat chops his neck, knocking him off the gurney.

The sneering computer guy hangs up his phone and pulls forward a small cattle prod from his apparatus.

HAWK

This is the worst night...

SNICKERS

When it rains, it pours.	Name's
Snickers.	The plane leaves in 40.

Snickers zaps Hawk in the leg with his device. Hawk a-a-ghs into a kneeling position. Snickers returns to his suitcase and is passed by a PLEASANT YOUNG BLACK WOMAN in the "outfit."
 

ALMOND JOY

Almond Joy.	I know, pretty silly.
But it's better than when we first
started out, our code names were
Diseases.	You don't know what
it's like being called Clymidia
for a year.
(walking off)
Whoops, forgot....

She deftly kicks Hawk across the face. Hawk angrily bounds back up until he sees the BIGGEST MEMBER OF THE GROUP Fe-Fi-Fo-Fum his way toward them. Suddenly, the Giant clumsily trips over Snickers' suitcase apparatus and ram-collapses into Hawk and the gurney. Laying atop Hawk, Butterfinger goofily speaks...

BUTTERFINGER

My name's Butterfinger.

HAWK

No shit.

The mysterious group parts to reveal a much more mature and cynically subdued man dressed in big lapels and a hat that screams Old Time CIA. His name will be GEORGE
KAPLAN.

KAPLAN

Don't you just hate kids...

ALMOND JOY

George, you promised.	No Old CIA/
New CIA jokes...

KAPLAN

I call them the MTV.I.A.	Punks
think Bay of Pigs is an herbal tea.
They think the Cold War involves
penguins and...

HAWK

Don't I know you...

KAPLAN

You just might.	I'm the guy who
tricked you into robbing a
government installation and then
had you sent to prison for it.	At
the time, I was bald with a beard,
no moustache, and I had a different
 
nose, so if you don't recognize me,

I won't be offended.

HAWK
Bastard, you're going to need
another nose!

Hawk explodes upward. Everyone but cool Kaplan draws a gun.

HAWK

But I'm not the type of guy to
hold a grudge.

KAPLAN

I used you as a diversion.	while
you were getting captured upstairs,
I was shredding documents in the
basement.	Deep down, I guess I
was just jealous.	You were one
incredible thief...

HAWK
To what do I owe the dishonor of a
reunion, you centrally intelligent
scumsicle.

As Kaplan converses, Snickers and Butterfinger bring out a mammoth empty suitcase and open it behind Hawk.

KAPLAN

I Want to make things up to you.
That's why I got you this gig,
doll.	Hawk, my name's George
Kaplan and to quote the late,
great Karen Carpenter, "We've only
just begun."

HAWK

Three minutes, twenty-three
seconds.	If you think I'm doing
another...

KAPLAN

Hush.	My employer wants a meeting.

HAWK

Employer?	The president?

KAPLAN

No, somebody powerful.	Oh.	Look.
what's that up there?
 

HAWK

I'm supposed to fall for that?

KAPLAN

Shucks.	Guess not.

Kaplan savagely point-blank punches Hawk in the face, knocking him out cold and into the mammoth suitcase. Snickers slams it shut revealing a KENNEDY INTERNATIONAL sticker.

INT. MYSTERIOUS BARE ROOM--DAY

Hawk slowly awakens on an exotic couch. He has been put in an aggressively fashionable Italian outfit. He eyes and touches his new duds with complete bafflement. He then stumbles into a standing position to, mouth gaping, take in a wondrous 360 degree view of Rome, Italy as "O Solo Mio" blares on the soundtrack.

HAWK

No.	Way.

Hawk's spinning view and the music on the soundtrack slam to a halt as he zeroes in on the sight of Scary Butler Alfred elegantly reaching the top of the staircase.

ALFRED
Welcome to Rome, sir.

HAWK

Yes way.

EXT. OUTSIDE INTERESTING BUILDING--DAY

Alfred opens the back door of an omnipotent, Mayflower-logoed LIMOUSINE. The car moves off as Hawk slides in...

INT. THE BACK SEAT OF THE MAX-TECH LIMOUSINE

facing Darwin Mayflower who is blustering into the cellular.

While he talks, Darwin shakes Hawk's bewildered hand, then holding up one finger in a "be with you in a sec" facial move.

DARWIN

For those kind of wages, I could
have built the factory in America!
They're Vietnamese, can't we just
 
give them more Bart Simpson shirts?

I hear depressing news like this
and I want to commit genocide!
(slamming phone)
Alfred, hold my calls.	So, Hawk!
The Hawkster!	What do you think
of the vehicle?

HAWK

You could host American Bandstand
in here.	Why did you duck at the
auction, asshole?

DARWIN

Because I didn't want to get hurt,

taterhead.

A FAX MACHINE comes to life as Darwin babbles.

DARWIN

What can I tell you, I'm the
villain.	Initially it was a
priority to keep a lot of buffers
between you and me, but since most
of them are dead now, I thought
what the heck.	Hawk, you come
highly recommended.	I would have
done some things differently at
the auction house, but hey, I want
to be in business with you.

Darwin scans the Fax message with annoyance, and then shoves it into a violent paper shredder.

OUTSIDE THE LIMO SHREDDER

Shredded paper litters out of a vent on the outside door.

INSIDE THE LIMOUSINE

A simmering Hawk tries to explode but the phone rings.

HAWK

My life is not some deal.	I...

ALFRED (O.S.)

It's Boston, Mr. Mayflower.

DARWIN

I'm sorry, I have to take this.
Those are valid points though...
 

Darwin picks up the phone and goes Mr. Hyde, while giving Hawk "Can you believe this guy"-type gestures.

DARWIN
You better have a good excuse...
You better have a better excuse!
You are so weak!	I'm only
thankful your ancestors didn't
settle America or else my name
would be Running Brave or Vomiting
Antelope...Really.	Well, listen
close, babe.

Darwin holds the phone over a 50 cent piece-size siren in his armrest. Darwin presses a button and a PIERCING NOISE fills the car as it comes to a stop.

DARWIN

Shall we?

Darwin bolts out. Hawk hangs back, waiting for Rod Serling to explain things, then bolts out too.

EXT. E.U.R. DISTRICT BUILDING--DAY

Hawk and Darwin head up the steps of an overpowering fascistly marble superstructure. Alfred brings up the rear.

DARWIN

So Hawkasaurus, I won't mince
words...

HAWK

Whatever.	You own Boardwalk, you
own Park Place, you own the four
railroads.	You think you're God.
For all I know, you're probably
right.	I just wanted to have a
damn cappuccino, maybe play some
Nintendo after I find out what it
is.	Man, why didn't you just buy

the horse?	What am I saying, you
did buy it...

DARWIN

Oh... Let's see.	There are
organizations that think we wanted
the "Sforza" for reasons other
than putting it in the Da Vinci
museum we're building in Vinci.
Hopefully, these organizations
 
think our plan has been ruined

with the explosion of our replica.
If I seem vague, grand.	We want a
low profile on this, that's why I
got Kaplan and the Candy bars
involved.	I helped George help
the Mario Brothers and Gates help
get you out....

HAWK

If you're pausing for a "thank you," give it up. So boss, you going to tell me what the crystal piece inside the pony means?

DARWIN
Way to go, Alfie!	How many people
did you break that thing in front
of.	Good help's hard to find.

HAWK

I guess that's a no.

INT. MASSIVE CONFERENCE ROOM--DAY

A mind-blowingly pretentious painting of Darwin, Minerva, and Bunny hangs above a mammoth M-shaped conference table.

Lying atop the table in heels, shades, and a heart-stopping dark outfit is Minerva. NASTY Metal riffs semi-audibly spew from a headset she wears.

Surrounding the table is a VARIED GROUP OF OLD MONEY AND NEW MONEY BOARD MEMBERS ranging from a nine year old INDIAN PRINCE to a SWEET ELDERLY AMERICAN WOMAN. They converse to the person at their side in businesslike tones, oblivious to Minerva.

DARWIN

Ladies and gentlemen of the board...

The board members go into tableau silence. Minerva con-tinues a brief sing-a-long before Darwin scolds...

DARWIN

And Min-er-va.	Let's give it up
for Hudson Hawk.

The board applauds as Alfred pushes Hawk inside.

MINERVA

Hello......Bunny, Ball-Ball!
 

Minerva lobs a ball in the air. Bunny, the annoying dog, scurries beside Hawk to catch it.

Moving down toward the other end of the table, Hawk takes in the surreal surroundings with battle fatigue. He sees ONE BOARD MEMBER take a luxurious sip of cappuccino. Minerva paces up upon the table.

DARWIN
Hawkmeister, we got you clothes,
great hotel, and a 250,000 lira
per diem.

MINERVA

That's two hundred dollars a day?
So he can get a hooker and some
tequila.	Veto, Darwin.

HAWK

Guess I know who wears the penis
in this family.

MINERVA

(jumping off table)
For God's sake, chain this
convict.

With a yawn, Alfred pulls out a pair of state-of-the-art handcuffs.

HAWK

Alfred, you're a very polite
psychopath, but if you...

Hawk kicks out at Alfred, who nimbly moves slightly and gives a pummel to Hawk's body somersaulting him over the edge of the table, into an empty seat.

The Board Members politely applaud. Alfred pulls Hawk's hands around his back and cuffs him. Bunny intensely sniffs his crotch.

MINERVA

We want Da Vinci's sketchbook,
what do they call it, the Codex.

DARWIN
Listen Hawk, this might be hard to
believe, but I'm a regular joe.	I
just want to be happy and happiness
comes from the achieving of goals.
 
It's just when you make your first

billion by the age of 19, it's
hard to keep coming up with new
ones.	But now finally I got my
new goal.	World domination.	With
your help...Bunny....quit that!

MINERVA

Bunny, ball-ball!	Bad bunny!

HAWK

Think he's already got today's
ball-balls.	Five more minutes
please, it's been so long...

Minerva yanks away the yelping dog.

HAWK

Anybody have a cigarette?	But
seriously, do me a favor and
Concorde me back to prison.	I
don't care anymore.	I hope you
have the receipts for the threads.

MINERVA

You go back, you won't be alone.
You'll have a diabetic barkeep
cellmate.	You're still young
enough to have fun shanking child
molesters for a pack of smokes,

but "Alex" will go in knowing that
the next time he gets out it'll be
to attend his own funeral.
Depressing.

HAWK

You wouldn't risk the dime to call
the police.	You have no proof.

DARWIN

Ah, the magic word...

Alfred plants a slide machine on the table and Darwin starts clicking gorgeous images of Hawk and Alex robbing the auction house, on a bare wall.

The Board members gush. The Elderly Woman gives a thumbs-up.

DARWIN

It's veja du, Hawkhead.	Something
you wish never happened.	We shot
 
the entire operation with hidden

cameras behind the hidden cameras.
Hired the guy who did the last
Sports Illustrated Swimsuit issue.
Excellent work... whoops, damn
Fotomat assholes...

A slide hits the wall of himself and Minerva kneeling in Big Baby clothes with Alfred snarling over them, decked out in leather. He clicks ahead...

Hawk looks away and sees that the Board members have an annual Report-type booklet in front of them that reads--
THE DA VINCI/ALCHEMY PROJECT.

Minerva leans over in front of him.

MINERVA

Tomorrow, you're going to hit a
church.

CUT TO:

EXT. A MASSIVE WIDE SHOT OF ST. PETER'S--DAY

The Vatican stands in its glory, mobbed by HUNDREDS OF LOCALS AND SIGHTSEERS. The viewer's viewpoint zeroes in on the Mayflower limousine circling around it.

INT. THE LIMOUSINE

Hawk looks out from the back seat of the limousine in stylish Italian sunglasses.

HAWK
I'm robbing the Vatican.	The nuns
at St. Agnes predicted that I'd end
up doing this...

Two identical Twin Flunkies sit across from him, grinning stupidly. Hawk pushes up his sunglasses with his middle finger.

INT. VATICANESQUE MAP ROOM

Mentally casing the joint, Hawk gets some distance between him and the flunkies as he enters into a room that has a glorious, ancient Map of the World Mural.

INT. ANOTHER VATICAN ROOM

Hawk makes a scribble in a notepad before coming to a
 

Vatican guard, standing before a painting of a Pope performing a Coronation.

HAWK
(half-hearted)
Excuse me, I'm being blackmailed
into robbing the Vatican by a
psychotic American corporation
along with a CIA...

VATICAN GUARD

"You're being".....uh, I don't,
uh...

A jaded Hawk laughs and pats the cop on the back.

HAWK

Forget it, man.	Go tackle a
jaywalker.

INT./EXT. CIRCULAR OPEN AIR HALLWAY

Hawk comes out onto a circular open-air hallway. He scans up to some rooftops and makes a note...until he sees a line of International Phone Boothettes. Checking for Flunkies, he rips one up.

HAWK

Operator, I want to make a collect
call to Alex Messina, New York....

The Flunkies drift into view. Hawk hangs up and seethes off.

INT. HALLWAY LEADING TO CODEX ROOM

Hawk saunters down a long resplendent hallway toward a room at the end bustling with excitement. Coming to the mouth of the room, he looks to two gold framed mirrors on either side of the opening, rubs his head, and scribbles.

INSIDE THE CODEX ROOM

Hawk takes in the majestic beauty, and practical details, of the room--windows, statues, a Massive Ornate Lighting Fixture--as he moves down one of the twin winding stair-cases leading to a path of people behind velvet ropes and the object of their gaze...

THE DA VINCI CODEX

--an old book enclosed in a glass case, propped open to
 
the familiar BEAUTIFUL DRAWING of a MAN inside a CIRCLE.

The case is located between two informational tablets enclosed in glass columns. Enter Holy Da Vinci theme.

ANNA (V.O.)

But it is his gift as an inventor
who drew together science and art
that is most incredible.

Hawk brightens to the return of Anna, carrying a portfolio bag, striding down the stairs with a group of INVESTORS AND FAMILIES. She brightens back, giving him a quick verbal breath and a hand squeeze.

ANNA
Tough guy.	What are you--How's
your head.

HAWK

(vegetable)
Yes, and my giraffe loves it, too...

She laughs, going into her public voice.

ANNA

As you know, the Da Vinci Codex,
has lived in the Vatican for
centuries and will continue to
live here for centuries more.

HAWK

(under his breath)
That's what you theenk.

ANNA

Question, sir?	His untiring pen
predicted the airplane, the
submarine, the bicycle, the
helicopter, and even the tank.

A LITTLE BRAT trailing the group, moves next to Hawk, bitching away to her STUFFED ELEPHANT, POKEY.

LITTLE BRAT

This is so bor-ing!	Do you hate
Italy as much as I do, Pokey?
(bad ventriloquism)
Si, senor!	Italy sucks the big
one!	why can't we go to the Epcot
Center!
 

The Little Brat stops and lets Pokey the elephant dangle from her side. Hawk eyes the elephant strangely.

ANNA
These more dangerous designs
inspired him to develop a secret
code that ....

The stuffed elephant suddenly goes flying over Anna's head.

The ALARM goes off. The Massive Ornate Lighting Fixture swoops down from the ceiling, inverting in air, and slams down over the Codex, transformed into a makeshift cage.

Strange green gas comes billowing out of the vents.
Needless to say, everyone goes crazy.

Coughing gas, Hawk peeks to see that a line of light sensor alarms imbedded in the tablets are what set the alarm off.

Two GAS MASKS drop airlinesquely from the mouth of the entranceway and TWO RACING-IN GUARDS wrangle them on.

The Little Brat sees that Pokey the stuffed elephant has been beheaded by the cage/lamp. She is pulled away and spanked.

LITTLE BRAT

Pokey, come back!

Anna yanks a notetaking Hawk away as the gas blusters in around him. The Two Flunkies, eyes on Hawk, are hap-lessly making their way up the opposite staircase.

ANNA

Come on, this stuff will knock you
out.	Have you ever had the feeling
you were being followed, Mr. Bond.

HAWK

Never, why do you ask?

Reaching the top of the stairs, just outside the door, Anna briskly pulls Hawk into a PIECE OF WALL THAT IS REALLY A DOOR. The wall closes as the Flunkies come flying out, baffled.

INT. CIRCULAR STAIRCASE

Hawk, mucho impressed, and Anna move down a tight, dark
 
circular staircase.

HAWK

Whoa.	Name's Hawkins, Eddie
Hawkins.

My nickname's Hudson Hawk, but don't call me Hudson, not even as a joke. The Nuns at St. Agnes called me that and they're the ones who helped make me what I am today. Not a compliment...

ANNA

Sure Hudson.	Are you going to
tell me why you did that back there

or are you going to blame it
on Dumbo?

HAWK

Could you believe that crazy
elephant?

Anna shakes her head as she opens a door into...

INT. A LITTLE UNDERGROUND SUBWAY--DAY

A four foot high mail train rumbles down the track of a mini-underground station. Workers latch onto mail bags. Hawk and Anna emerge from a small door.

HAWK

Whoa, part 2.	Does it go to Times
Square?

ANNA
Delivers up to ten at night.	The
Pope has an obsession with his
Easter Seals.	It's actually not
that an unusual set-up.	The
secret passageway on the other
hand....

HAWK

The Vatican is made of constant
mysteries meant to be enjoyed,
not explained.

ANNA
Nice.	But right out of our
brochure.

HAWK
 
Oh, you read that.

ANNA

Actually I wrote it.	It's a good
sentence.	It can apply to people.

HAWK

You're not an unmysterious thang
yourself.

ANNA

I don't steal stuffed elephants
from little girls.
(smoothing his
jacket)

And I buy my own clothes.	My
life's a little boring...

HAWK

God, I wish I could say the same
thing.	What about having a nice,
dull dinner with me tonight.
Scrabble, Knock-knock jokes,
Anecdotes about famous dead
Italians....

ANNA

I'll bring my entire repertoire...

The Two Flunkies stumble into the station, looking around. Anna and Hawk crouch down.

HAWK

And I'll bring my entourage...

ANNA

Secret passageways don't mean as
much as they used to.	There's
a place two blocks east of here.
Enzo's.	Say 10:30.

HAWK

Said.

Hawk and Anna peck each other with a smile. He crawls out an exit door. As he leaves, Anna's smile disappears. She pulls out a rosary and gives herself a self-scolding bang on the head. She then darts to a large crucifix and looks up.

ANNA

Father, it's obvious.	He's up to
 
something.

Suddenly a speaker in Jesus's mouth gently crackles.

JESUS (Italian)
Report downstairs at once.

ANNA

Yes, sir.

INT. CATACOMBLIKE AREA

A CARDINAL paces in an enigmatic Vatican area. Anna clacks up to him.

CARDINAL
Did he mention the Mayflowers?

ANNA

No, your Eminence.	I think he's
going to steal the Codex, as
early as next week.

CARDINAL

Attempt, you mean.	The vanity
of this man, Hudson Hawk.	The
Vatican has foiled the advances
of Pirates and Terrorists.	We
will not lie down for some
schmuck from New Jersey.	Must
you flirt with him so realistically?

ANNA

That's the best kind.	A wise
woman once said "Polite
conversation is rarely either."

CARDINAL

(chuckling)
Let me be the one to quote
Scripture.	....As an agent of
our organization, you are put in

awkward situations.	Just
remember, Hudson Hawk is an evil,
evil man.

ANNA

(unconvinced)
Yeah.	The big E.

EXT. NAVONA PIAZZA--DAY
 

The evil Hawk clumsily strides around a fountain, looking off in all directions, soft-shoes past some sedate painters and swings into...

INT. A BIG QUIRKY PHONE BOOTH

Hawk grabs up the phone and dials....

HAWK

Hello, operator.	I'd like to
make a collect call to New York
number...

The Mayflower limousine creeps to the edge of the piazza, behind an oblivious Hawk.

HAWK

Thank you, operator, thank you.

Hawk turns, putting a finger in his ear. Seeing the limo, he FREAKS and balls himself into a corner.

HAWK
Come on, Alex, pick up, you
Reindeer goat cheese-eating
motherfucker.

INT. ALEX'S RESTAURANT--NIGHT
 

It is late night in New York. bar of Alex's restaurant with
 


A phone rings atop the no one in sight.

 

INT. PIAZZA--DAY

Hawk pokes his head to see a Darwin and Minerva (holding Bunny) emerge from the limousine. As he turns his con-centration back to the phone, ALEX HIMSELF flows out from a building to cheerfully speak with Darwin and Minerva and get licked by Bunny, before they all pile into the limo.

HAWK

A-lex, A-lex, come on Alex.

Hawk slams down the phone and turns to see the limousine pull off.

Hawk angrily bursts from the door and is painfully CLOTHESLINED by agent Butterfinger, who is dressed as a mailman.

Crumpled on the ground, Hawk kicks out with his foot,
 

into Butterfinger's stomach, doubling him. Hawk then grabs him by the head and rams into the glass of the booth.

Hawk rotates off for an escape...but the rest of the CIA crew cuts him off holding barely concealed guns; Snickers dressed as a maitre 'd, Almond Joy as a Bermuda tourist, and Kaplan in his usual emsemble. Kit Kat is dressed exactly like Hawk, right down to a bloody lip. Hawk gives him a double take.

KAPLAN

Hawk, Hawk, Hawk.	Enjoying
Italy?	I always had a soft spot
for Rome.	Did my first barehanded

strangulation here.	Communist
politician.

HAWK

Why George, you big softie...

KAPLAN

God, I miss communism.	The Red
Threat.	People were scared, the
Agency was respected, and I got
laid every night.

A humiliated Butterfinger comes waddling out, holding the phone. Kaplan rolls his eyes.

BUTTERFINGER

Sorry, coach...

KAPLAN

(shaking his head)
If his father wasn't the head of
Shit, I hate this, the
government's got me farmed out,
working for the Mayflower
corporation now, money beats
politics.	War isn't Hell anymore,
it's Dull.	Don't slaughter their

men and rape their women, just
steal their microchips.

HAWK

You know Kaplan, if you weren't
the slimiest pinata of shit that
ever lived, I'd feel sorry for
you.

SNICKERS
 

Good news, bud, the Mayflowers have moved up the time-table. You're hitting the Vatican to-night.

HAWK

Tonight?	You're whacked.	The
timing's off, I'm underequipped
Damnit, I have a date!

Almond Joy smoothly extracts Hawk's notebook and reads...

ALMOND JOY

Grapple, Biker's bottle, hairspray,
black turtleneck, Pocket
Fisherman, acid, collapsible

yardstick, softball, and 72 stamps.
Gee Stud, this is going to be
some date.	No Harvey's Bristol
Cream?

KAPLAN

Snickers, make the list happen.
Oh and it's one thing to play
hide and seek with the Mayflower's
pathetic staff, but we're sore
losers.	I've put jumper cables
on the nipples of children and
not always in the line of duty.

HAWK

Thanks for sharing.

KAPLAN

We blow up space shuttles for
breakfast.	You and your friend
Alex would be a late afternoon
Triscuit.

HAWK

If you do anything to my friend...

KAPLAN

Yeah, right.	By the way, as long
as I'm getting things off my
chest, I'm the one who killed your
little monkey.	Made it look like
a Mafia hit.	Did it for fun.
Ciao.

Kaplan and the crew quickly disperse in different directions as Hawk howls in frustration. Kit Kat moves behind Hawk and perfectly mimics him.
 

HAWK

What did you have against Little
Eddie, motherfucker?	He was just
a monkey who liked to laugh.
Come back without your yuppie
army.	I'll triscuit you, you
space shuttle eating...Shit.!

Without looking, Hawk elbows the mimic Kit Kat in the face. Kit Kat gives Hawk a strange smile and hands him a card that reads: BEWARE THE ODD STEPS.

Hawk looks up from the card. Kit Kat is gone, but Butterfinger scampers in his place.

BUTTERFINGER

Hey, Mr. Hawk, I got those 72
stamps!

Sighing, Hawk takes the huge sheath of stamps.

EXT. INDOOR TRAIN TRACK

One of the small Vatican mail trains bullets across an indoor track. The viewer's viewpoint whooshes to catch up, focusing on a very large package, addressed to the Pope, that has Hawk's sheath of stamps slapped onto it. The train zips into a tunnel.

INT. THE VATICAN UNDERGROUND SUBWAY

The train rumbles into the Vatican mini-station. TWO HARRIED WORKERS heave up the strange cargo onto a sorting table.

A bell rings as a clock hits 10. The workers do a sigh of relief. Shucking off their uniforms, they head out.

A hand rips out of the huge package.

INT. OUTSIDE THE CODEX ROOM--NIGHT

Hawk pops out of the secret passageway door and moves to the mouth of the doorless Codex room. He pauses to hand-comb his hair in the two large, framed mirrors at the sides.

THE CODEX ROOM

Carrying the now frameless mirrors in each hand, Hawk hustles to the top of the steps and suddenly stops.
 

HAWK

"Beware the Odd Steps."

Hawk crouches down and notices the step below him has a clear magnetic tape running across it to a dime sized alarm button.

HAWK

Why Kit Kat, aren't you a
gentleman...

Hawk bounds down every other one of the steps down to where the Codex is bathed in a holy light.

He hefts up the two now frameless mirrors and puts them each in a groove of a collapsible yardstick running across the top. The parallel mirrors now face out from each other. Hawk sprays a blast of Clairol to reveal the light sensor beams, and then with a deep breath, he thrusts the mirrors into the beams.

The light bounces harmlessly off the mirrors and Hawk exhales. He balances the connected mirrors then crawls through his tent-like passageway.

Hawk squirts acid from a biker's bottle on the cracks of the rectangular glass case that holds the Codex. The acid sizzles.

INT. VATICAN LIBRARY HALLWAY--NIGHT

A BURLY GUARD thoughtfully stares at a painting, fingers propping his chin like an critic then continues ambling on.

THE CODEX ROOM

Rubbing his head, Hawk gives an excited smile as the glass cracks of the rectangular case loosen. Hawk pulls out a pocket fisherman....

The viewer's viewpoint moves upward to reveal, through the mouth of the room, the Burly Guard is coming down the hall.

OUTSIDE THE CODEX ROOM

Burly Guard approaches the outskirts of the Codex room. He combs his hair into the piece of wall in the now empty mirror-frame then REALIZES.
 

Muttering Italian into his walkie-talkie, Burly Guard rushes into the room and looks down to the sensor deflecting mirrors.

He passes a statue, behind which, Hawk is revealed to be standing.

Burly Guard approaches the Codex and sees the dripping acid. He also notices a fishing hook attached to the binding of the Codex. The fishing wire leads out of the glass case. The Guard reaches to touch it when suddenly the wire is pulled tightly upward by a moving-out-from-behind-the-statue Hawk.

The Codex FLIES off its perch, setting off the ALARM and sending the bizarre cage/lamp CRASHING DOWN and AROUND the hapless Burly Guard. The green gas commences its noxious billowing as the Codex swooshes into Hawk's hands. He then hurls a softball, smashing a window on the other side of the room.

The familiar Vatican Guard and a Guard Three barrel down into the mouth of the codex room. Only one Gas Mask drops from the doorway. The Vatican Guard pulls it on and gives a "That's Life" shrug of shoulders to the fainting Guard three.

Hawk puts on the missing gas mask and launches a grapple around the ceiling cord of the dropped Ornate Lighting Fixture. Hawk then Tarzans from one staircase to another. He then ungrapples and heads toward the shattered window.

The Vatican Guard waits a stunned moment before giving chase.

EXT. THE ROOF

Hawk flings off his gas mask and begins a classical skipping-across-the-rooftop jaunt. Suddenly a brick on the slightly slanted roof gives way and Hawk FALLS. His canvas bag goes skipping down across the roof, landing against the antennae.

INT. THE POPE'S BEDROOM

A T.V. showing Mr. Ed. speaking to Wilbur in Italian goes fuzzy. THE POPE, wearing his famous hat and a Notre Dame bathrobe angrily bangs on it.

EXT. THE ROOF
 

Hawk harvests his grapple on the level part of the roof and slides down toward the dangling-off-the-antennae bag.

The Vatican Guard pops out of the window and fires a warning shot.

Hawk stretches to the bag. His fingers touch as the Guard continues to bound forward.

HAWK
Please God, Please God.......let
the guard shoot me.

Hawk pulls up the bag and turns himself to see Vatican Guard hovering over him on the roof.

VATICAN GUARD

The worm's on the other foot,
yankee noodle candy.

Hawk sees the Vatican Guard's foot move toward the grapple. Hawk ferociously tugs, ripping the Guard off-balance and knocking down a side of the roof.

EXT. TOP OF A NEARBY WALL

Hawk dashes atop a nearby wall and hurls his grapple across a road around a tree branch. Hawk ties the end of grapple line, tosses on a friction belt, takes a breath and JUMPS OFF THE WALL. The viewer follows him on his breathtaking ride.

The brused Vatican Guard flops back atop the roof. He gets off a wild shot before crumpling back down.

HAWK

is alnost to the other side when the Guard's bullet hits the friction belt. Hawk drops with a wild scream...

and lands with a painful straddle atop a street lamppost. His eyes bug out with the thought of a life without children. He slowly spins off the lamppost and sails down upon...

EXT. A BUS

and the comfortable luggage housed on top of it. Hawk tries to maintain his balance upon the wobbling baggage, but the bus makes a quick turn and Hawk goes flying off...

EXT. RIGHT INTO A CAFE CHAIR--NIGHT
 

Panting and discombobulated, Hawk looks across the table to the female hands holding open a menu. The menu comes down. It is Anna. Hawk unpretzels and laps his canvas bag.

ANNA

Oh Hudson, I was worried you
weren't going to drop by....

HAWK

I never break a date.	Scout's
honor.

Hawk does the honor sign with his black gloved hand then quickly rips it off as a WAITER comes to the table.

HAWK

Fettucini con Funghi Porcini.

WAITER

Bellissimo, signor.

HAWK

Oh, and could I have some ketchup
with that.

Anna hits her forehead with the palm of her hand while the waiter's entire body sinks in disappointment. Other TABLE OCCUPANTS sadly shake their heads.

EXT. ANOTHER TABLE--NIGHT

At a comfortable distance curled behind a heat lamp, Snickers is being an Uglier American to an UNCOMPREHENDING WAITER, while Almond Joy chuckles and Butterfinger spreads butter over an entire baguette.

SNICKERS

Come on, Pierre, Steak-bur-ger,
Fren-n-ch Fries.	This is France,

you gotta have French.....

ALMOND JOY

Actually we're in Italy, Snickers, she said as if it made a difference.

The Waiter sneaks off.	Butterfinger devours his bread.

SNICKERS

Italy, France, Moscow.	They all
 
just wanna be Nebraska.	Old Man

Kaplan thinks since Communism is
dead, we got nothing to do.	Man,
Democracy isn't free elections.
We gotta teach the world that
Democracy is Big Tits, College
Football on Saturdays, Eddie
Murphy saying the word "Fuck"
and Kids putting their hands down
garbage disposals on "America's
Funniest Home Videos."

ALMOND JOY

Damn baby, when's the last time
you had a vacation...Jesus, I

gotta get out of this job.	If
my Mom knew her daughter
assassinated the leader of the
anti-Apartheid movement....

SNICKERS

Quit bitching, you got the
employee of the month plaque for
that shit...Ah to be in Pari-is
and in love.

They look off to....
