All the shooters tighten, taking aim.	It's a tense moment.

JIM (V.O.)
The shooters across Dealey Plaza
tighten, taking their aim across

their sights...	waiting for the
radio to say "Green Green!" or "Abort

Abort!"

The camera is on Kennedy waving. A MONTAGE follows - all the faces in the square that we've introduced in the movie now appear one after the other, watching - the killers, the man with the umbrella, the Newman family, Mary Moorman photographing, Jean Hill, Abraham Zapruder filming it, S.M. Holland, Patrolman Harkness... INTERCUT with the Zapruder and Nix films on J.F.K. in the final seconds coming abreast of the Stemmons Freeway sign.

JIM (V.O.)
The first shot rings out.

CUT TO the Dal-Tex shooter firing. We see the back of Kennedy's through his gun sight. Kennedy (stand in) reacts in the Zapruder film.

JIM (V.O.)
Sounding like a backfire, it misses

completely... Frame 161, Kennedy
stops waving as he hears something.
Connally turns his head slightly to

the right.
 

Everything goes off very fast now. Repeating intercuts are slowed down with shots of Kennedy reacting in the Zapruder film.

JIM (V.O.)
Frame 193 - the second shot hits

Kennedy in the throat from the front.
Frame 225 - the President emerging
from the road sign.	He obviously

has been hit, raising his arms to
his throat.

CUT TO: the picket fence shooter hitting him from the fence. We see Kennedy (stand in) from the point of view of his telescopic sight. In the Zapruder film, we see Kennedy clutch his throat.

JIM
Frame 232, the third shot - the

President has been hit in the back,
drawing him downward and forward.
Connally, you will notice, shows no
signs at all of being hit.	He is
visibly holding his Stetson which is

impossible if his wrist has been
shattered.

CUT TO: the Dal-Tex shooter. We see Kennedy from his point of view, and the Zapruder film in slow motion.

JIM (V.O.)

Connally's turning now here.	Frame
238... the fourth shot misses Kennedy
and takes Connally in the back.

This is the key shot that proves two
rifles from the rear.	This is 1.6
seconds after the third shot, and we
know no manual bolt action rifle can
be recycled in that time.	Connally

is hit, his mouth drops, he yells
out, "My God, they're going to kill
us all"... Here...

CUT TO: the sixth floor shooter firing rapidly and missing Kennedy but hitting Connally (stand in).

JIM (V.O.)
...the umbrella man is signalling
"He's not dead.	Keep shooting."

James Tague down at the underpass is
hit sometime now by another shot
that misses.

CUT TO: the umbrella man pumping his umbrella. The Cuban is looking off. The man on the curb in the construction helmet
 

is looking not at J.F.K. but up at the Book Depository.

JIM (V.O.)
The car brakes.	The fifth and fatal
shot - frame 313 - takes Kennedy in

the head from the front...

CUT TO the picket fence shooter. We see J.F.K. from his point of view. He fires, and then we see Kennedy in the Zapruder film flying backwards and to his left in a ferocious, conclusive spray of blood and brain tissue. We repeat the shot.

JIM (V.O.)
This is the key shot.	Watch it again.

The President going back to his left.
Shot from the front and right.

Totally inconsistent with the shot
from the Depository.	Again -
(repeats)... back and two the left.

(he repeats it like a mantra)...
back and to the left...	back and to
the left.

Kennedy's car speeds off. Jackie is like a crawling animal in a pillbox hat on the back of the car. The people on the other side of the underpass wave innocently as the car speeds through with it's horrifying contents. Pigeons fly off the rooftop of the Book Depository.

JIM (V.O.)
What happens then?	Pandemonium.

The shooters quickly disassemble
their various weapons, all except
the Oswald rifle.

CUT TO: sixth floor spotter dumping the Mannlicher - Carcano in a corner as he leaves... and then to the Dal-Tex spotter and shooter, who break down the gun and move out... and then to the spotter with the fence shooter, who quickly breaks down the weapon, throwing it in the trunk of a car parked at the fence. He walks away. The fence shooter, dressed as a policeman, blends with the crowd.

CUT TO: the umbrella man and the Cuban sitting quietly together on the north side of the curb of Elm Street.

CUT TO: stunned, confused, people in the crowd - some lying on the ground, some running for the Grassy Knoll.

Back in the courtroom, patrolman Joe Smith is on the stand.

JIM (V.O.)
Patrolman Joe Smith rushed into the
parking lot behind the fence.	He

smelled gunpowder.
 

FLASHBACK TO: the picket fence area where, with his gun drawn, Smith rushes across to a man standing by a car who reacts quickly, producing credentials. He is one of the hoboes. There's a strange moment when the camera moves from Smith's eyes to the man's fingernails.

SMITH (V.O.)
...the character produces credentials
from his pocket which showed him to

be Secret Service.	So I accepted
that and let him go and continued
our search.	But I regretted it,
'cause this guy looked like an auto
mechanic.	He had on a sports shirt

and pants, but he had dirty
fingernails.	Afterwards it didn't

ring true, but at the time we were
so pressed for time.

JIM (V.O.)
Yet all Secret Servicemen in Dallas

that day are accounted for.	None
were on foot in Dealey Plaza before
or after the shooting, till Dallas

Secret Service Chief Forrest Sorrels
returned at 12:55.

Back in the courtroom, Liz is totally absorbed. Jim exchanges looks with her. The camera movies in for a close - up of Jim.


JIM
(pausing for effect)
What else was going on in Dealey

Plaza that day?	At least 12 other
individuals were taken into custody
by Dallas police.	No records of
their arrests.	Men acting like hoboes
were being pulled off trains, marched

through Dealey Plaza, photographed,
and yet there is no records of their
arrests.

FLASHBACK TO: the three hoboes being arrested ... marching across Dealey Plaza. The hoboes look familiar now.

JIM (V.O.)
Men identifying themselves as Secret
Service Agents were all over the

place.	But who was impersonating
them?

FLASHBACK TO: men in suits, ties, and hats moving people out of the parking lot area ... turning a policeman back.
 

FLASHBACK TO: the Cuban, putting away a radio, and the umbrella man, who now rise and leave the area in opposite directions.

JIM (V.O.)

And where was Lee Oswald?	Probably
in the second floor snack room.
Eddie Piper and William Shelly saw
Oswald eating lunch in the first
floor lunch room around twelve.

Around 12:15, on her way out of the
building to see the motorcade,
secretary Carolyn Arnold saw Oswald
in the second floor snack room, where
he said he went for a Coke...

In the second floor lunchroom of the Book Depository we see Carolyn Arnold, a pregnant secretary, crossing past Oswald, who is in a booth.

CAROLYN ARNOLD (V.O.)
He was sitting in one of the booths

on the right hand side of the room.
He was alone as usual and appeared
to be having lunch.	I did not speak

to him but I recognized clearly.	I
remember it was 12:15 or later.	It
coulda been 12:25, five minutes before
the assassination, I don't exactly
remember.	I was pregnant and I had

a craving for a glass of water.

On the sixth floor of the depository, Bonnie Ray Williams is eating a chicken lunch, alone.

JIM
(VO)

At the same time, Bonnie Ray Williams
is supposedly eating his chicken
lunch on the sixth floor, at least

until 12:15, maybe 12:20 ... he sees
nobody.

On the street, Arnold Rowland and his wife look up at the sixth floor windows and we see, from their point of view, two shadowy figures...

JIM (V.O.)
Down on the street, Arnold Rowland
was seeing two men in the sixth floor

windows... presumably after Bonnie
Ray Williams finished his lunch and
left.

We see footage of J.F.K. coming up Houston - waving.
 

Oswald walks into the second floor lunchroom as policeman Marrion Baker runs in, gun at his side. He is about 30 feet from Oswald. Roy Truly, the superintendent, runs in a moment later.

JIM (V.O.)
Kennedy was running five minutes

late for his appointment with death.
He was due at 12:25.	If Oswald was
the assassin, he was certainly pretty

non-chalant about getting himself
into position.	Later he told Dallas
police he was standing in the second
floor snackroom.	Probably told to
wait there for a phone call by his

handler.	The phones were in the
adjacent and empty second floor

offices, but the call never came.	A
maximum 90 seconds after Kennedy is
shot, patrolman Marrion Baker runs

into Oswald in that second story
lunchroom.

BAKER
Hey you!

(to Truly)
Do you know this man?	Is he an
employee?

TRULY

Yes he is.
(as Baker moves on)

The President's been shot!

Oswald reacts as if hearing it for the first time. Truly and Baker continue running up the stairs. Oswald proceeds to get a Coke and continues out of the room.

CUT TO: the sixth floor, where we see Oswald as the shooter. After firing, he runs full speed for the stairs, stashing the rifle on the other side of the loft. Our camera follows him roughly down stairs - we hear the loud sound of his shoes banging on the hollow wood - to the lunchroom, where Patrolman Baker and Superintendent Truly run in. Then they start to repeat the same action as seen in the previous scene.

JIM (V.O.)

...but what the Warren Report would
have us believe is that after firing
3 bolt action shots in 5.6 seconds,

Oswald then leaves three cartridges
neatly side by side in the firing
nest, wipes the rifle clear of
fingerprints, stashes the rifle on
the other side of the loft, sprints

down five flights of stairs, past
 

witnesses Victoria Adams and Sandra
Styles who never see him, and then

shows up cool and calm on the second
floor in front of Patrolman Baker -
all this within a maximum 90 seconds

of the shooting.	Is he out of breath?
According to Baker, absolutely not.

CUT TO: the second floor. Oswald ambles past Mrs. Reid, a secretary in the second floor office, on his way out, Coke bottle in hand and wearing his usual dreamy look... there's a lingering close - up on his face.

JIM (V.O.)
Assuming he is the sole assassin,

Oswald is now free to escape from
the building.	The longer he delays,

the more chance the building will be
sealed by the police.	Is he guilty?
Does he walk out the nearest

staircase?	No, he buys a Coke and
at a slow pace, spotted by Mrs. Reid
in the second floor office, he strolls
out the more distant front exit,
where the cops start to gather...

Outside, we see Oswald stroll out the door of the Book Depository into the crowd. He heads for the bus stop to the east.

JIM (V.O.)
Oddly, considering three shots are

supposed to have come from there,
nobody seals the Depository for ten
more minutes.	Oswald slips out, as

do several other employees.	Of
course, when he realized something
had gone wrong and the President
really had been shot, he knew there
was a problem.	He may even have

known he was the patsy.	An intuition
maybe - the President killed in spite
of his warning.	The phone call that
never came.	Perhaps fear now came
to Lee Oswald.	He wasn't going to

stand around for roll call.

Back in the courtroom, Jim continues speaking:

JIM

The story gets pretty confusing now -
more twists in it than a watersnake.
Richard Carr says he saw four men
take off from the Book Depository in
a Rambler that possibly belongs to

Janet Williams.	Deputy Roger Craig
 

says two men picked up Oswald in the
same Rambler a few minutes later.

Other people say Oswald took a bus
out of there, and then because he
was stuck in traffic, he hopped a

cab to his rooming house in Oak
Cliff...

FLASHBACK TO: Oswald's boarding house. Oswald enters his room, passing Earlene Roberts, the heavyset white housekeeper.

JIM (V.O.)

...we must assume he wanted to get
back in touch with his intell team,
probably at a safehouse or at the

Texas Theatre, but how could he be
sure?	He didn't know who to trust

anymore...

ROBERTS

(watching TV)
My God, did you see that, Mr. Lee?
A man shot the President.

The camera closes in on Oswald's perplexed face. Earlene peeks out the shades as she hears two short honks on a horn.

Outside is a black police car driven by Tippit. Also in the car is the fence shooter, dressed as a Dallas policeman.

The car drives by, honks twice, waits, then moves away. During this visual, we see the fence shooter changing his uniform into civilian clothes.

JIM (V.O.)
Oswald returns to this rooming house

around 1 P.M., half hour after the
assassination, puts on his jacket,
grabs his .38 revolver, leaves at
1:04... Earlene Roberts, the
housekeeper, says she heard two beeps

on a car horn and two uniformed cops
pulled up to the house while Oswald
was in his room, like it was a signal
or something... Officer Tippit is
shot between 1:10 and 1:15 about a

mile away.	Though no one actually
saw him walking or jogging, the

Government says Oswald covered that
distance.	Incidentally, that walk,
if he did it, is in a straight line

toward Jack Ruby's house.	Giving
the government the benefit of the
doubt, Oswald would have had to jog
a mile in six to eleven minutes and
commit the murder, then reverse

direction and walk 3/5 of a mile to
 

the Texas Theatre and arrive sometime
before 1:30.	That's some walking.

On a street, Oswald walks alone, fast. A police car pulls up alongside him on 10th Street. Oswald leans on the passenger side of the window. Officer Tippit, suspicious, gets out to question him. Oswald pulls his .38 revolver and shoots him down in the street with 5 shots.

JIM (V.O.)

It's also a useful conclusion.	After
all, why else would Oswald kill
Officer Tippit, unless he just shot
the President and feared arrest?
Not one credible witness could

identify Oswald as Tippit's killer.

Domingo Benavides, hidden in his truck only a few yards away, watches as another unidentified man (not seen before) shoots and walks away.

JIM (V.O.)

Domingo Benavides, the closest witness
to the shooting, refused to identify
Oswald as the killer and was never

taken to a lineup.

We see Acquilla Clemons, a black woman, looking on. She watches as two men kill Tippit. One of them resembles the fence shooter. The other one is a mystery figure, seen before in the fringes. The men walk off quickly in opposite directions. We notice a policeman's uniform hanging in the back seat of Tippit's car.

JIM (V.O.)

Acquilla Clemons saw the killer with
another man and says they went off
in separate directions.	Mrs. Clemons
was never taken to lineup or to the
Warren Commission.	Mr.	Frank Wright,

who saw the killer run away, stated
flatly that the killer was not Lee
Oswald.	Oswald is found with a .38
revolver.	Tippit is killed with a
.38 automatic.	At the scene of the

crime Officer J.M. Poe marks the
shells with his initials to record

the chain of evidence.

CUT TO: Policeman Poe marking the bullets.

JIM (V.O.)

Those initials are not on the three
cartridge cases which the Warren
Commission presents to him.
 

On a Dallas avenue near the Texas Theatre, Oswald moves along, spooked. Police cars roar by with sirens blaring. Johnny Brewer, in a shoestore, spots him and follows him.

JIM (V.O.)

Oswald is next seen by shoe salesman
Johnny Brewer lurking along Jefferson
Avenue.	Oswald is scared.	He begins
to realize the full implications of
this thing.	He goes into the Texas

Theatre, possibly his prearranged
meeting point, but though he has $14
in his pocket, he does not buy the
75-cent ticket.	Brewer has the
cashier call the police.

Outside the Texas Theatre Oswald walks past the cashier, who is out on the sidewalk watching the police cars go by. A double feature is playing - Cry of Battle with Van Heflin and War is Hell. He goes in.

CUT TO: 30 officers arriving at the theatre in a fleet of patrol cars.

JIM (V.O.)

In response to the cashier's call,
at least thirty officers in a fleet
of patrol cars descend on the movie
theatre.	This has to be the most
remarkable example of police intuition

since the Reichstag fire.	I don't
buy it.	They knew - someone knew -

Oswald was going to be there.	In
fact, as early as 12:44, only 14
minutes after the assassination, the

police radio put out a description
matching Oswald's size and build.
Brewer says the man was wearing a
jacket, but the police say the man
who shot Tippit left his jacket

behind.	Butch Burroughs, theatre
manager, says Oswald bought some
popcorn from him at the time of the
Tippit slaying.	Burroughs and witness
Bernard Haire also said there was an

Oswald look - alike taken from the
theatre.	Perhaps it was he who

sneaked into the theatre just after
1:30.

Inside the theatre, Cry of Battle is on the screen. Twelve to fourteen spectators sit scattered between the balcony and ground floor. Brewer leads the officers onto the stage and the lights come on. He points to Oswald.

JIM (V.O.)
 

In any case, Brewer helpfully leads
the cops into the theatre and from

the stage points Oswald out...

The cops advance on Oswald, who jumps up, as if expecting to be shot.

OSWALD
This is it!

POLICEMAN
Kill the President, will you?

Scared, Oswald takes a swing at a policeman. He pulls out his gun. The officers close in on him from the rear and front. A wrestling and shoving match ensues. One officer gets a chokehold on Oswald and another one hits him.

JIM (V.O.)
The cops have their man!	It was

already been decided - in Washington.

Outside the theatre, Oswald, his eye blackened, is led out by the phalanx of officers. They are surrounded by an angry crowd.

CROWD

Kill him!	Kill him!

JIM (V.O.)

Dr. Best, Himmler's right hand man
in the Gestapo, once said "as long

as the police carries out the will
of the leadership, it is acting
legally."	That mindset allowed for

400 political murders in the Weimar
Republic of 1923 - 32, where the
courts were controlled and the guilty
acquitted.	Oswald must've felt like
Josef K in Kafka's "The Trial".	He

was never told the reason of his
arrest, he does not know the unseen
forces ranging against him, he cries
out his outrage in the police lineup
just like Josef K excoriates the

judge for not being told the charges
against him.	But the state is deaf.

The quarry is caught.	By the time
he is brought from the theatre, a
large crowd is waiting to scream at

him.	By the time he reaches police
headquarters, he is booked for
murdering Tippit...

At the Dallas police station, Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz takes a call from a high official in Washington. In
 

the background we notice Lee Oswald continuing to be questioned by federal agents. We hear Johnson's distinctive Texas drawl but we never see him.

JIM (V.O.)

No legal counsel is provided.	No
record made of the long questioning.

HIGH OFFICIAL VOICE
Howdy there, Cap'n.	Thanks for taking

care of us down in Dallas.	Lady
Bird and I will always be grateful.

FRITZ
Thank you, Mr. President.	We're

doing our best.

HIGH OFFICIAL VOICE
Cap'n, I know you're working like a
hound dog down there to get this

mess wrapped up, but I gotta tell
you there's too much confusion coming
out of Dallas now.	The TVs and the
papers are full of rumour 'bout
conspiracies.	Two gunmen, two rifles,

the Russkies done it, the Cubans
done it, that kinda loose talk, it's
carin' the shit outta people, bubba'.
This thing could lead us into a war
that could cost 40 million lives.

We got to show'em we got this thing
under control.	No question, no

doubts, for the good of our country...
you hear me?

FRITZ
Yes, sir.

HIGH OFFICIAL VOICE
Cap'n, you got your man, the

investigation's over, that's what
people want to hear.

The camera closes in on Oswald in the background. He turns to an unseen Deputy, sad.

OSWALD

Now everyone will know who I am.

JIM (V.O.)

By the time the sun rose the next
morning, he is booked for murdering
the President.	The whole country -
fueled by the media - assumes he's
guilty.
 

In an underground police garage, we see Jack Ruby being allowed in via an interior staircase by his police contact. He moves towards the outer edge of reporters, nervous.

Oswald comes out with his two guards. We see a repeat of the assassination in stop time... Ruby's eyes, Oswald's... do they recognize each other?

JIM (V.O.)
Under the guise of a patriotic

nightclub owner out to spare Jackie
Kennedy from having to testify at a
trial, Jack Ruby is shown into the
underground garage by one of his
inside men on the Dallas Police Force,

and when he's ready Oswald is brought
out like a sacrificial lamb and nicely

disposed of as an enemy of the people.
By early Sunday afternoon, the autopsy
has been completed on him.	Who

grieves for Lee Harvey Oswald?	Buried
in a cheap grave under the name
"Oswald"?	No one.

We see Oswald dying on the floor of the police station. A paramedic pushes in and starts administering artificial respiration, which only aggravates the internal hemorrhaging.

At a Texas cemetery, Oswald's mother weeps. Oswald is buried with a few people present, but there are no details, no dates. We see Marina whisked out by agents.

CUT TO Kennedy's funeral, which, in contrast, attracts thousands of mourners.

JIM (V.O.)
Within minutes false statements and

press leaks about Lee Oswald circulate
the globe.

FLASHBACK TO X: reading about it in the New Zealand Airport, and then back to the courtroom in 1969.

JIM
The Official Legend is created and

the media takes it from there.	The
glitter of official lies and the

epic splendor of the thought-numbing
funeral of J.F.K. confuse the eye
and confound the understanding.

Hitler always said "the bigger the
lie, the more people will believe
it."	Lee Oswald - a crazed, lonely
man who wanted attention and got it
by killing a President, was only the

first in a long line of patsies.	In
 

later years Bobby Kennedy and Martin
Luther King, men whose commitment to

change and to peace would make them
dangerous to men who are committed
to war, would follow, also killed by

such "lonely, crazed men," who remove
our guilt by making murder a
meaningless act of a loner.	We have
all become Hamlets in our country -
children of a slain father - leader

whose killers still possess the
throne.	The ghost of John F. Kennedy
confronts us with the secret murder
at the heart of the American dream.
He forces on us the appalling

questions:	Of what is our
Constitution made?	What is our

citizenship, and more, our lives
worth?	What is the future of a
democracy where a President can be

assassinated under conspicuously
suspicious circumstances while the
machinery of legal action scarcely
trembles?	How many political murders,
disguised as heart attacks, cancer,

suicides, airplane and car crashes,
drug overdoses will occur before
they are exposed for what they are?

Liz watches, moved. Susie, Al and Numa are also there for the summation. Even Lou Ivon has come back to support his friend.

JIM
"Treason doth never prosper," wrote

an English poet, "What's the reason?
For if it prosper, none dare call it
treason."	The generals who sent
Dreyfus to Devils Island were among
the most honorable men in France,

the men who killed Caesar were among
the most honorable men in Rome.	And
the men who killed Kennedy, no doubt,
were honorable men.	I believe we
have reached a time in our country,

similar to what life must've been
like under Hitler in the 30's, except

we don't realize it because Fascism
in our country takes the benign
disguise of liberal democracy.	There

won't be such familiar signs as
swastikas.	We won't build Dachaus
and Auschwitzes.	We're not going to
wake up one morning and suddenly

find ourselves in gray uniforms goose - stepping off to work ... "Fascism
 

will come," Huey Long once said. "in
the name of anti-fascism" - it will

come in the name of your security -
they call it "National Security," it
will come with the mass media

manipulating a clever concentration
camp of the mind.	The super state
will provide you tranquility above
the truth, the super state will make
you believe you are living in the

best of all possible worlds, and in
order to do so will rewrite history
as it sees fit.	George Orwell's
Ministry of Truth warned us, "Who
controls the past, controls the

future."

The camera follows Jim around the courtroom.

JIM

The American people have yet to see
the Zapruder film.	Why?	The American
people have yet to see the real
photographs and X - rays of the
autopsy.	Why?	There are hundreds

of documents that could help prove
this conspiracy.	Why have they been
withheld or burned by the Government?
Each time my office or you the people
have asked those questions, demanded

crucial evidence, the answer from on
high has been "national security."

What kind of "national security" do
we have when we have been robbed of
our leaders?	Who determines our

"national security"?	What "national
security" permits the removal of
fundamental power from the hands of
the American people and validates

the ascendancy of invisible government

in the United States?	That kind of
"national security," gentlemen of
the jury, is when it smells like it,
feels like it, and looks like it,

you call it what it is - it's Fascism!

I submit to you that what took place
on November 22, 1963 was a coup

d'etat.	Its most direct and tragic
result was a reversal of President
Kennedy's commitment to withdraw

from Vietnam.	War is the biggest
business in America worth $80 billion
a year.	The President was murdered
by a conspiracy planned in advance
at the highest levels of the United

States government and carried out by
 

fanatical and disciplined Cold
Warriors in the Pentagon and CIA's

covert operations apparatus - among
them Clay Shaw here before you.	It
was a public execution and it was

covered up by like - minded
individuals in the Dallas Police
Department, the Secret Service, the
FBI, and the White House - all the
way up to and including J. Edgar

Hoover and Lyndon Johnson, whom I
consider accomplices after the fact.

The camera holds on onlookers shuffling and murmuring. Clay Shaw smirks, smoking his cigarette. The very grandiosity of the charge works in his favor. Jim is falling apart from built - up strain and fatigue. He looks over at Liz, gathering his spirit.

JIM (V.O.)

There is a very simple way to
determine if I am being paranoid
here.
(laughter)
Let's ask the two men who have

profited the most from the
assassination - your former President
Lyndon Baines Johnson and your new
President, Richard Nixon - to release
51 CIA documents pertaining to Lee

Oswald and Jack Ruby, or the secret
CIA memo on Oswald's activities in

Russia that was "destroyed" while
being photocopied.	All these
documents are yours - the people's

property - you pay for it, but because
the government considers you children
who might be too disturbed to face
this reality, because you might lynch
those involved, you cannot see these

documents for another 75 years.	I'm
in my 40's, so I'll have shuffled
off this mortal coil by then, but
I'm already telling my 8 year - old
son to keep himself physically fit

so that one glorious September morning
in 2038 he can walk into the National

Archives and find out what the CIA
and the FBI knew.	They may even
push it back then.	It may become a

generational affair, with questions
passed down from father to son, mother
to daughter, in the manner of the
ancient runic bards.	Someday
somewhere, someone might find out

the damned Truth.	Or we might just
 

build ourselves a new Government
like the Declaration of Independence

says we should do when the old one

ain't working - maybe a little farther
out West.

He approaches the jury.

JIM
An American naturalist wrote, "a

patriot must always be ready to defend
his country against its government."
Well, I'd hate to be in your shoes

today.	You have a lot to think about.
Going back to when we were children,
I think most of us in this courtroom
thought that justice came into being

automatically, that virtue was its
own reward, that good would triumph
over evil.	But as we get older we

know that this just isn't true.
"The frontier is where a man faces a
fact."	Individual human beings have
to create justice and this is not
easy because truth often presents a

threat to power and we have to fight
power often at great risk to
ourselves.	People like Julia Ann
Mercer, S.M. Holland, Lee Bowers,
Jean Hill, and Willie O'Keefe have

come forward and taken that risk.
(he produces a stack

of letters)
I have here some $8000 in these
letters sent to my office from all

over the country - quarters, dimes,
dollar bills from housewives,
plumbers, car salesmen, teachers,
invalids ... These are the people
who cannot afford to send money but

do, these are the ones who drive the
cabs, who nurse in the hospitals,
who see their kids go to Vietnam.
Why?	Because they care, because
they want to know the truth - because

they want their country back, because
it belongs to us the people as long

as the people got the guts to fight
for what they believe in!	The truth
is the most important value we have

because if the truth does not endure,
if the Government murders truth, if
you cannot respect the hearts of
these people...
(shaking the letters)

...then this is no longer the country
 

in which we were born in and this is
not the country I want to die in...

And this was never more true than
for John F. Kennedy whose murder was
probably the most terrible moment in

the history of our country.	You the
people, you the jury system, in
sitting in judgement on Clay Shaw,
represent the hope of humanity against
Government power.	In discharging

your duty, in bringing the first
conviction in this house of cards
against Clay Shaw, "Ask not what
your country can do for you, but
what you can do for your country."

Do not forget your young President
who forfeited his life.	Show the

world this is still a government of
the people, for the people, and by
the people.	Nothing as long as you

live will ever be more important.
(he stares into the
camera)
It's up to you.

He returns to the table and sits.	The courtroom is still.

CUT TO: later in the same courtroom. The jury files in, having reached a verdict. Jim, prepared, sits with his staff and Liz. The jury foreman enters the courtroom.

JURY FOREMAN

We find Clay Shaw... not guilty on
all counts.

There's jubilation and commotion in the Court. Shaw stands, happily shaking hands all over... Members of the press run for the phones. In the corridor outside the courtroom, the press interviews the jury foreman.

FOREMAN
We believe there was a conspiracy,

but whether Clay Shaw was a part of
it is another kettle of fish.

The camera moves to Jim, who walks out past the banks of reporters. TV lights are in his face. Liz is by his side.

ENGLISH REPORTER
Mr. Garrison, the American media is

reporting this as a full vindication
of the Warren Commission, do you...

JIM
I think all it proves is you cannot

run a trial even questioning the
 

intelligence operations of the
government in the light of day.

NEWSMAN 13
We understand that The Times -

Picayune will call for your
resignation - unfit to hold office.
You've ruined Clay Shaw's reputation -
are you going to resign?

JIM
Hell, no.	I'm gonna run again.	And

I'm gonna win.	Thank you very much.
If it takes me 30 years to nail every
one of the assassins, then I will

continue this investigation for 30
years.	I owe that not only to Jack

Kennedy, but to my country.

He and Liz squeeze hands as they walk on.

DISSOLVE TO WASHINGTON, D.C. - (1970)

Jim waits on the same park bench as earlier in the film, overlooking the Mall or the Lincoln Monument... as X walks up, a little grayer, a little more stooped, wearing ill fitting civilian clothes.

JIM
Well, thanks for coming.

X

You didn't get that break you needed,
but you went as far as any man could,
bubba.

(he sits next to Jim)
What can I do for you?

JIM
Just speculating, I guess.	How do

you think it started?

X
I think it started in the wind.
Money - arms, big oil, Pentagon

people, contractors, bankers,
politicians like L.B.J. were committed

to a war in Southeast Asia.	As early
as '61 they knew Kennedy was going
to change things... He was not going

to war in Southeast Asia.	Who knows?
Probably some boardroom or lunchroom
somewhere - Houston, New York - hell,
maybe Bonn, Germany... who knows,
it's international now.
 

CUT TO: a New York lunch club or executive dining room. From the window we have a towering view of the City. Four men in their 50's to 70's - old men, rich men, talk at a quiet table. Their figures are shadowy and we overhear their conversation obliquely, across faces flared out by sun bouncing off the skyscraper window.

X (V.O.)
One worried sonofabitch with a few
million dollars turns to the others...

with a few million dollars... and
says something pretty direct like...

RICH MAN 1
The sonofabitch is gonna get re-

elected by a bigger vote than ever
in '64.	It's gonna be worse than

Roosevelt.	The country won't survive
as we know it.

RICH MAN 2
I agree, Bob, it can't go on.

(he looks to Man 3)

RICH MAN 3

...and Bobby in '68?	Something's
got to be done.

Looks pass among them.	There's a pause, and then...

RICH MAN 1
He's gotta go, Lou.	The election's

gotta be stopped.

There is a breathless moment with the thought in the air.

RICH MAN 1

I talk to a lot of people.	I know
I'm not the only one thinking this.

RICH MAN 2
What's the feeling in Washington,

Jack?

FLASHBACK TO: the Pentagon in 1962.

X (V.O.)

...so calls are made.	Down to
Washington.	All over the world.
They start talking about it.	A few

people here, there.	Just
conversations, nothing more...

We see a general meeting with another general.	They talk.

X (V.O.)
 

Generals, Admirals, CIA people, and
probably some people on the inside

of Kennedy's staff - young, brilliant
Judases, ready to go to war in
Southeast Asia...

FLASHBACK TO: the White House, 1962. A general talks to one of Kennedy's staff - a bespectacled, bright young Harvard type.

X (V.O.)
...and maybe a Vice-President getting

separate memos from Vietnam, eager
to get his backers the billions of
dollars in contracts for Southeast

Asia...

In a White House office, Lyndon Johnson meets with a cabinet member, a contractor, and two military men.

X (V.O.)
Kennedy, like Caesar, is surrounded

with enemies.	Something is underway
but it has no face.	Yet everyone in
the loop knows...

The camera shows Washington, D.C. buildings from strange angles. The feeling is still, weird, angled, alien. The buildings are twisted.

X (V.O.)
Money is at stake.	Big money.	A

hundred billion.	The Kennedy brothers
target voting districts for defense
dollars.	They give TFX fighter

contracts only to the counties that
are going to make a difference in
'64.	These people fight back.	Their
way.	One day another call is made...

In a Pentagon office, a man in civilian clothing is on the phone, his back to the screen. This is Mr. Y, X's superior officer. Shadows pervade the room. An unshuttered window overlooks the Potomac River and the White House.

X (V.O.)
...maybe to somebody like my superior

who's been running the "Mongoose"
program out of Florida and who has
no love for Kennedy.

VOICE ON PHONE

Bill, we're going.	We need your
help.

X (V.O.)
 

Everything's cellurized.	No one has
said "he must die," there's been no

vote, there's nothing on paper,
there's no one to blame.	It's as
old as the Crucifixion: the Mafia

firing squad, one blank, no one's
guilty because everyone in the Power
Structure who knows anything has a
plausible deniability.	There are no
compromising connections except at

the most secret point.	But what's
paramount is that it must succeed.
No matter how many die, how much it
costs, the perpetrators must be on
the winning side and never subject

to prosecution for anything by anyone.
That is a coup d'etat.

Y
(into phone)

When?

VOICE ON PHONE
In the fall.	Probably in the south.
We want you to come up with a plan...

X

He's done it before.	Other countries.
Lumumba in the Congo, Trujillo, the
Dominican Republic, he's working on

Castro.	No big deal.	In September,
Kennedy announces the Texas trip.

At that moment, second Oswalds start
popping up all over Dallas where
they have the mayor and the cops in

their pocket.	Y flies in the
assassins, maybe from the special
camp we keep outside Athens, Greece -
pros, maybe some locals, Cubans,
Maria hire, separate teams.	Does it

really matter who shot from what
rooftop?	Part of the scenery.	The
assassins by now are dead or well
paid and long gone...

JIM
Any chance of one of them confessing

someday?

X

...don't think so.	When they start
to drool, they get rid of 'em.	These
guys are proud of what they did.
They did Dealey Plaza!	They took
out the President of the United

States!	That's entertainment!	And
 

they served their country doing it.

JIM
(in present)
...and your General?

X

...got promoted to two stars, but he
was never military, you know, always
CIA.	Went to Vietnam, lost his

credibility when we got beat over
there, retired, lives in Virginia.
I say hello to him when I see him at
the supermarket...

JIM
Ever ask him?

X
You never ask a spook a question.

No point.	He'll never give you a
straight answer.	General Y still
thinks of himself of the handsome
young warrior who loved this country
but loved the concept of war more.

JIM

His name?

X

Does it matter?	Another technician.
But an interesting thing - he was

there that day in Dealey Plaza.	You
know how I know?
(Jim shakes his head)

That picture of yours.	The hoboes...
you never looked deep enough...

FLASHBACK TO: one of the hobo pictures. Next to the freight entrance of the Book Depository, Y, in a dark suit, is nonchalantly walking past the hoboes, his back to us. The camera closes in on Y.

X (V.O.)
I knew the man 20 years.	That's

him.	The way he walked... arms at
his side, military, the stoop, the

haircut, the twisted left hand, the
large class ring.	What was he doing
there?	If anyone had asked him,

he'd probably say "protection" but
I'll tell you I think he was giving
some kind of "okay" signal to those
hoboes - they're about to get booked
and he's telling 'em it's gonna be

okay, they're covered.	And in fact
 

they were - you never heard of them
again.

JIM
...some story... the whole thing.

It's like it never happened.

X
It never did.
(he smiles tartly)

JIM

Just think... just think.	What
happened to our country .. to the
world...	because of that murder...

Vietnam, racial conflict, breakdown
of law, drugs, thought control, guilt,

assassinations, secret government
fear of the frontier...

X
I keep thinking of that day, Tuesday

the 26th, the day after they buried
Kennedy, L.B.J. was signing the
memorandum on Vietnam with Ambassador

Lodge.

FLASHBACK TO: the White House, 1963. Johnson sits across the shadowed room with Lodge and others. His Texas drawl rises and falls. He signs something unseen.

JOHNSON

Gentlemen, I want you to know I'm
not going to let Vietnam go the way
China did.	I'm personally committed.

I'm not going to take one soldier
out of there 'til they know we mean
business in Asia...
(he pauses)
You just get me elected, and I'll

give you your damned war.

X (V.O.)
...and that was the day Vietnam
started.

CUT TO: Documentary footage of - U.S. Marines arriving in full force on the beaches of Danang, March 8, 1965... as another era begins and our movie ends.

ON A BLACK SCREEN WE READ:

**	In 1975, VICTOR MARCHETTI, former executive assistant to the CIA's deputy director, stated that during high - level CIA meetings during Shaw's trial in 1969, CIA director RICHARD HELMS disclosed that CLAY SHAW and DAVID FERRIE had worked
 

for the Agency, and asked his assistants to make sure Mr.
Shaw received Agency help at his trial.

**	In 1979, RICHARD HELMS, director of covert operations in 1963, admitted under oath that CLAY SHAW had Agency connections.

**	It is now known that in 1963, U.S. military intelligence controlled more agents than the CIA and had almost as much money to spend. It surfaced in the 1970's that the Army had long been conducting surveillance and keeping files on thousands of private citizens in the name of national security. The prime targets were dissident-left-wingers of the kind Oswald appeared to be.

**	CLAY SHAW died in 1974 of supposed lung cancer. No autopsy was allowed.

**	WILLIAM SULLIVAN, Assistant Director of the FBI, died in

the early morning hours of November 9,177 when he was mistaken for a deer in an open field in New Hampshire. Shortly before his death, Sullivan had a preliminary hearing with the HSCA.

**	GEORGE DE MOHRENSCHILDT committed suicide just hours after HSCA investigator Gaeton Fonzi located him.

**	In November, 1969 JIM GARRISON was re-elected to a third term as District Attorney of Orleans Parish. In June of 1971, he was arrested by Federal Agents on charges of allowing payoffs on pinball gambling by organized crime. In September of 1973, after defending himself in Federal Court, he was quickly found not guilty of charges that appear to have been framed against him. Less than six weeks later, he was narrowly defeated for a fourth term as District Attorney.

**	In 1978, Garrison was elected Judge of the Louisiana State Court of Appeal in New Orleans. He was re - elected in 1988. To this date, he has brought the only public prosecution in the Kennedy killing.

**	ELIZABETH and Jim were divorced in 1978. He now lives in the same house he lived in with Elizabeth. She lives a block away. Their five children are grown.

**	SOUTHEAST ASIA: 58,000 American lives, 2 million Asian

lives, $220 billion spent, 10 million Americans air - lifted there by commercial aircraft, more than 5,000 helicopters lost, 6.5 million tons of bombs dropped.

**	A Congressional Investigation from 1976 - 1979 found a "probable conspiracy" in the assassination of John F. Kennedy and recommended the Justice Department investigate further. As of 1991, the Justice Department has done nothing. The files of the House Select Committee on Assassinations are locked away until the year 2029.
 

The camera moves onto the mottoes chiselled in the walls of the National Archives in Washington, D.C.:

"STUDY THE PAST"

"PAST IS PROLOGUE"

"ETERNAL VIGILANCE IS THE PRICE OF LIBERTY"

DEDICATED TO THE YOUNG, IN WHOSE SPIRIT THE SEARCH FOR TRUTH MARCHES ON.
