Credits run in counterpoint through a 7 to 10 minute sequence of documentary images setting the tone of John F. Kennedy's Presidency and the atmosphere of those tense times, 1960 through 1963. An omniscient narrator's voice marches us through in old time Pathe' newsreel fashion.

VOICE
January, 1961 - President Dwight D.

Eisenhower's Farewell Address to the
Nation -

EISENHOWER ADDRESS

EISENHOWER
The conjunction of an immense military
establishment and a large arms

industry is new in the American
experience.	The total influence -
economic, political, even spiritual -
is felt in every city, every
statehouse, every office of the

Federal Government... In the councils
of government we must guard against
the acquisition of unwarranted
influence, whether sought or unsought,
by the military industrial complex.

The potential for the disastrous
rise of misplaced power exists and
will persist... We must never let
the weight of this combination
endanger our liberties or democratic

processes.	We should take nothing
for granted...

ELECTION IMAGERY

School kids reciting the Pledge of Allegiance. WPA films of farmers harvesting the Texas plains. Rain, thunderheads, a dusty car coming from far away on a road moving towards Dallas. Cowboys round up the cattle. Young marrieds in a church. Hillsides of tract homes going up. The American
 

breadbasket, the West. Over this we hear Eisenhower's address. As we move into the election campaign of 1960, we see the TV debates, Nixon vs. Kennedy, Mayor Daley, Kennedy victorious...

Against this is juxtaposed other forces: segregation, J. Edgar Hoover, military advisors, Castro, Marilyn Monroe, Lumumba... three frames of the Zapruder film counter-cut...

ending with the Kennedy inauguration and the irony of Earl Warren administering the oath as he will Kennedy's eulogy.

VOICE 2

November, 1960 - Senator John F.
Kennedy of Massachusetts wins one of
the narrowest election victories in

American history over the Vice-
President Richard Nixon by a little

more than 100,000 votes.	Rumors
abound that he stole the election in
Illinois through the Democratic

political machine of Mayor Daley...
(inauguration shots)
At his inauguration, at a time when
American males all wore hats, he let
his hair blow free in the wind.

Alongside his beautiful and elegant
wife of French origin, Jacqueline
Bouvier, J.F.K. is the symbol of the
new freedom of the 1960's, signifying
change and upheaval to the American

public, scaring many and hated
passionately by some.	To win the

election and to appease their fears,
Kennedy at first takes a tough Cold
War stance.

BAY OF PIGS IMAGERY

The beach, the bombardment, the rounding up of prisoners, Kennedy's public apology, Allen Dulles standing next to J.F.K., both uncomfortable with the small talk...

VOICE 3
He inherits a secret war against the
Communist Castro dictatorship in

Cuba, a war run by the CIA and angry
Cuban exiles out of bases in the

Southern United States, Panama,
Nicaragua and Guatemala.	Castro is
a successful revolutionary frightening

to American business interests in
Latin America - companies like Cabot's
United Fruit, Continental Can, and
Rockefeller's Standard Oil.	This
war culminates in the disastrous Bay

of Pigs invasion in April 1961, when
 

Kennedy refuses to provide air cover
for the exile brigade.	Of the 1600

men who invade, 114 are killed, 1200
are captured.	The Cuban exiles and
the CIA are furious at Kennedy's

irresolution... Kennedy, taking public
responsibility for the failure,
privately claims the CIA lied to him
and tried to manipulate him into
ordering an all-out American invasion

of Cuba.	He vows to splinter the
CIA into a thousand pieces and fires
Director Allen Dulles, Deputies
Charles Cabell and Richard Bissell,
the top leadership of the Agency.

SECRET WAR IMAGERY

Cuban rallies, footage of training camps, espionage activities, boats, cases of weapons, Robert Kennedy... John Roselli, Sam Giancana, Santos Trafficante, Richard Helms (the new CIA chief), Bill Harvey, Head of ZR/RIFLE, Howard Hunt...

VOICE 4

The CIA, however, continues it's
secret war on Castro with dozens of
sabotage and assassination attempts
under it's ZR/RIFLE and MONGOOSE
programs - The Agency collaborates

with organized crime elements such
as John Roselli, Sam Giancana, and

Santos Trafficante of Tampa, whose
casino operations in Cuba, worth
more than a hundred million dollars

a year in income, Castro has shut
down.

CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS

Khrushchev, Kennedy, Castro on television, meetings with Cabinet, Russian vessels in Caribbean, U.S. nuclear bases on alert, civilians going to underground safe areas... the Russian ship turning around, the country smiling...

VOICE 5
In October 1962, the world comes to

the brink of nuclear war when Kennedy
quarantines Cuba after announcing
the presence of offensive Soviet

nuclear missiles 90 miles off American
shores.	The Joint Chiefs of Staff
and the CIA call for an invasion.
Kennedy refuses.	Soviet ships with
more missiles sail towards the island,

but at the last moment turn back.
 

The world breathes with relief but
backstage in Washington, rumors abound

that J.F.K. has cut a secret deal
with Russian Premier Khrushchev not
to invade Cuba in return for a Russian

withdrawal of missiles.	Suspicions
abound that Kennedy is "soft on
Communism."

NUCLEAR TEST BAN IMAGERY

Closing down Cuban Camps, McNamara speaking, Khrushchev and Kennedy, the "hot line" telephone system inaugurated, Kennedy with Jackie and children sailing off Cape Cod... Vietnam introduction, early shots, Green Berets, counterinsurgency programs, De Lansdale, leading up to the Test Ban signings... then J.F.K. at American University, June 10, 1963.

VOICE 6
In the ensuing months, Kennedy clamps

down on Cuban exile activities,
closing training camps, restricting
covert operations, prohibiting
shipment of weapons out of the
country.	The covert arm of the CIA

nevertheless continues its plan to
assassinate Castor... In March '63,
Kennedy announces drastic cuts in
the defense budget.	In November
1963, he orders the withdrawal by

Christmas of the first 1000 troops
of the 16,000 stationed in Vietnam.

He tells several of his intimates
that he will withdraw all Vietnam
troops after the '64 election, saying

to the Assistant Secretary of State,
Roger Hilsman, "The Bay of Pigs has
taught me one, not to trust generals
or the CIA, and two, that if the
American people do not want to use

American troops to remove a Communist
regime 90 miles from our coast, how
can I ask them to use troops to remove
a Communist regime 9,000 miles
away?"... Finally, in August 1963,

over the objections of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, the United States,

Great Britain and the Soviet Union
sign a treaty banning nuclear bomb
tests in the atmosphere, underwater

and in space...	Early that fateful
summer, Kennedy speaks of his new
vision at American University in
Washington.

JFK
 

What kind of peace do we seek?	Not
a pax Americana enforced on the world

by American weapons of war... We
must re-examine our own attitudes
towards the Soviet Union... If we

cannot now end our differences at
least we can help make the world
safe for diversity.	For, in the
final analysis, our most basic link
is that we all inhabit this small

planet.	We all breathe the same
air.	We all cherish our children's
future.	And we are all mortal...

CONCLUDING KENNEDY IMAGERY

Diplomats at the United Nations... Adlai Stevenson, Castor... Martin Luther King and the March on Washington (a snatch of his "I Have a Dream" speech)... Bobby Kennedy and Jimmy Hoffa going at it... U.S. Steel Chairman's remarks in the steel face-off, men going to courtrooms with briefcases,... Teddy Kennedy, Rose, Joe, the Kennedy family, all teeth and good looks... and of course John campaigning, always campaigning, shaking hands, smiling, that supremely warm smile and sense of grace and ability to convey to crowds their oneness with him... forever... culminating in the more specific Texas shots... with Jackie in San Antonio, and Houston... then at Fort Worth... then at Love Field moving through the clouds toward the Dallas/Forth Worth plain which suddenly breaks into view as we descend...

LOUISIANA HIGHWAY - DAY (1963)

A moving car carrying two Cuban males disgorges a rumpled, screaming woman, Rose Cheramie, a whore in her thirties, lying there bleeding in the dirt. The car drives off.

HOSPITAL - DAY (1963)

We see Rose, badly cut but quite lucid, trying to reason

with a policeman, Lt. Fruge, and a doctor - in a remote black-and-white documentary.

ROSE
They're going up to Dallas... to

whack Kennedy.	Friday the 22nd,
that's when they're going to do it.

In Dealey Plaza.	They're gonna whack
him!	You gotta call somebody, these
are serious fuckin' guys.

DOCTOR

(to the police officer)
Higher'n a kite on something.	Been
like this since she came in.
 

BACK TO DOCUMENTARY IMAGES

We see the last close-ups of Kennedy shaking hands on the tarmac at Love Field, smiling, into the motorcade... the downtown streets of Dallas, people packing the sidewalks clear back to the buildings, hanging out of windows ten stories up, schoolgirls surging out into the street in front of the car. The President is wildly popular - except for the occasional posters calling for his arrest for treason...

VOICE 7
More rumors emerge of J.F.K.'s

backdoor efforts outside usual State
Department and CIA channels to
establish dialogue with Fidel Castro

through contacts at the United Nations
in New York.	Kennedy is seeking

change on all fronts.	Bitter battles
are fought with Southern
segregationists to get James Meredith

into the University of Mississippi.
Three months after Kennedy submits a
sweeping civil rights bill to
Congress, Martin Luther King leads
250,000 in a march on Washington.

Robert Kennedy, as Attorney General,
for the first time ever vigorously
prosecutes the Mafia in American
life, bringing and winning a record
number of cases - 288 convictions of

organized crime figures including 13
grand juries against Jimmy Hoffa and

his Teamsters Union.	The President
also takes on Big Business, forcing
back steel prices, winning 45 of 46

antitrust cases during 1963 and he
wants to help everyday taxpayers by
ending age- old business privileges
like the oil depletion allowance and
the fees paid to the Federal Reserve

Bank for printing America's currency.
Revolutionary changes are foreseen
after J.F.K.'s assumed re-election
in 1964.	Foremost in the political
consciousness of the country is the

possibility of a Kennedy dynasty.
Robert Kennedy in '68, Teddy Kennedy

in '76.	In November, 1963 John
Kennedy travels to Texas, his
popularity sagging to 59% largely

due to his civil rights stand for
which he is particularly hated in
the South.	Texas is a crucial state
for him to carry in '64.	With him
is Vice-President, Lyndon Johnson

and Texas Governor John Connally.
 

On November 21, they visit Houston
and San Antonio.	On the morning of

November 22, he speaks in Fort Worth,
then flies 15 minutes to Love Field
in Dallas, where he takes a motorcade

through downtown Dallas on his way
to speak at 12:30 at the International
Trade Mart.	Later, the motorcade
takes him through Dealey Plaza at
12:30...

DEALEY PLAZA - THAT DAY (NOV. 22, 1963)

We see a massive overhead shot of the Plaza as it lay then. Credits conclude under shot - and we have the subtitle "November 22, 1963."

A young epileptic screams and suddenly collapses near the fountains in front of the Texas School Depository. He has a violent epileptic fit that attracts surrounding attention. Dallas policemen run over to him. We hear the siren of an ambulance roaring up.

TIMECUT TO ambulance loading the epileptic man and taking off.

AMBULANCE VOICE

We are en route to Parkland.

BACK TO a montage of the shooting. We see Kennedy, in the last seconds, waving, turning the corner at Houston from Main... We see TV footage and a piece of Zapruder film from before the shooting; fragmented images...

CUT TO stages shots of crowd people looking on. The images are grainy to match the tone of the Zapruder film. People are on rooftops, hollering. The crowd is wild with enthusiasm. We pan past Jack Ruby and slam into him in black-and-white. The camera shows a Cuban man with a radio; a man with an umbrella; subliminals. Through open windows on the fifth floor of the Criminal Courts Building, convicts watch and holler from their jail cells. We see the sixth floor of the Texas Book Depository with open windows and a vague blur of a figure and a rifle.

The clock on the Hertz sign reads 12:30.

VOICE
We'll be there in about five minutes.

A motorcycle officer paralleling the Kennedy car tries to use his radio.

It's jammed. The sound of the jammed Dictabelt drives the rest of the sequence.
 

We see Zapruder, a short middle - aged man, shooting his 8mm film from the Grassy Knoll, and then we see Jackie Kennedy - floating on film, her voice, high, soft:

JACKIE KENNEDY

(voice restaged)
And in the motorcade, you know I
usually would be waving mostly to
the left side and he was waving mostly
to the right, which is one reason

you're not looking at each other
very much.	And it was terribly hot.
Just blinding all of us... We could
see a tunnel in front of us.
Everything was really slow then.

And I remember thinking it would be
so cool under that tunnel.

The camera rests on Jackie for a beat, and then we see the shot of the little schoolgirl skipping on the grass.

CUT TO the approaching overpass. J.F.K. waves... Mrs. Connally turns to J.F.K. The shot is crazy, fractured, surreal.

MRS. CONNALLY (V.O.)
Mr. President, you can't say that

Dallas doesn't love you.

JFK (V.O.)

No, you certainly can't.

Then we hear the shots: the volley sounds like a motorcycle backfire. We catch a glimpse of a muzzle flash and smoke. We see a view from the street of the Texas School Book Depository - all in line with the "official" version of events. Pigeons by the hundreds suddenly shoot off the roof. Then the screen goes gray as did CBS TV's first bulletins to the country.

CBS BULLETIN
(full screen)

We interrupt this program to bring
you this flash bulletin.	A burst of
gunfire!	Three bursts of gunfire,

apparently from automatic weapons,
were fired at President Kennedy's

motorcade in downtown Dallas.

We hear voices under this from everywhere, colliding in confusion and horror:

VOICES
OH NO!	MY GOD THEY'RE GOING TO KILL
US ALL!	Be still.	You're going to

be all right.	LET'S GET OUT OF HERE.
 

WE'RE HIT!	LAWSON, THIS IS KELLERMAN.
WE ARE HIT.	GET US TO THE HOSPITAL

IMMEDIATELY.	PULL OUT OF THE
MOTORCADE.	TAKE US TO THE NEAREST
HOSPITAL.

JACKIE KENNEDY VOICE

Oh, no, they've shot Jack... I love
you, Jack... Jack... they've killed
my husband...

CBS BULLETIN (V.O.)

The first reports say that President
Kennedy has been seriously wounded
by the shooting.	More details just

arrived.	United Press say the wounds
to President Kennedy perhaps could

be fatal.	Repeating: President
Kennedy has been shot by a would-be
assassin in Dallas.	Three bursts of

gunfire, apparently from automatic
weapons...

VOICES
(blending under)
IT CAME FROM THERE.	SECURE THAT
AREA BEHIND THE FENCE.	IT'S THAT
BUILDING UP THERE.

We hear sirens and screeching tires. The screen is still gray, randomly intercut with the end of the Nix film showing the car escaping. There are wildly tracking shots of the crowd running towards the Grassy Knoll.

The camera pans up the little set of stairs. We see more faces.

Someone in a suit stops our camera.	Secret Service?

We see the briefest glimpse from the Zapruder film. The camera moves in on the open umbrella next, then to the freeway sign, then to Mrs. Kennedy out of the car reaching for help, then to the agent rushing onto the rear fender. The car finally speeds away. The people on the other side of the underpass wave at the oncoming hearse from hell. (These are fragmented, mystifying shots. The main effect is one of blackout - of not knowing; of being in the dark, as we all were back then.)

CUT TO JIM GARRISON'S OFFICE - NEW ORLEANS - SAME DAY (1963)

Pause. The lovely old china clock on the wall reads 12:35. Somewhere a car backfires. We see a close-up of the clock moving to 12:36. We hear the sound of a pen on paper, scratching... We see a shot of Jim Garrison as a young air pilot in World War II; hear the sound of airplanes. The
 

camera moves to framed photos of Jim as a young, Lincolnesque lawyer... we hear sounds of political rallies, cheering... a shot of Jim's grandfather shaking hands with President William Taft. The sound of bulldozers carries us to a shot of Jim staring at piles of decaying corpses at Dachau... a photo of Clarence Darrow... a law degree and an appointment as District Attorney of the New Orleans Parish... Mother Garrison with young Jim on the desk... another family - his own. We look across the thick desk with the chess set, A Complete

Works of William Shakespeare and a Nazi helmet with a bullet hole in it... to Jim himself writing - pen to paper. We sense the quiet intellect of the 43 year old man. The clock ticks in the awful suspended silence.

It's as if the air itself has been sucked from the silent room. This is the last moment of peace before the World will rush through the door in all its sound and fury - to change his life forever. The camera haywires into a close-up of Jim as he looks up... and knows.

Lou Ivon, Jim's chief investigator, is already standing there in the room. He is burly, in his 30s - his expression universal for that day.

JIM
What's wrong, Lou?

LOU
Boss, the President's been shot.	In

Dallas.	Five minutes ago.

Jim is stunned. His look of horror and shock speaks the same language as on faces all across America that Black Friday.

JIM

Oh no!... How bad?

LOU

No word yet.	But they think it's in
the head.

Jim gets up, heading rapidly for the door.

JIM
Come on.	Napoleon's has a TV set.

NAPOLEON'S RESTAURANT - THE QUARTER - DAY(1963)

The midday customers all stare solemnly at the TV set high

in the corner of the cafe. The manager, ashen, serves drinks to Jim and Lou.

NEWSMAN 1

Apparently three bullets were found.
 

Governor Connally also appeared to
be hit.	The President was rushed by

the Secret Service to Parkland
Memorial Hospital four miles from
Dealey Plaza.

We are told a bullet entered the base of the throat and came out of the backside, but there is no confirmation, blood transfusions are being given, a priest has administered the last rites.

JIM

There's still a chance, dammit!
Come on, Jack - pull through.

MANAGER
(Italian, distracted)

I don't believe it.	I don't believe
it.	Here, in this country.

They all look up, expectant, as Walter Cronkite interrupts on the TV:

WALTER CRONKITE
From Dallas, Texas - the flash

apparently official, President Kennedy
died at 1 p.m.	Central Standard
Time, 2 o'clock Eastern Standard
Time, some 38 minutes ago.
(choked pause)

Vice-President Johnson has left the
hospital in Dallas, but we do not

know to where he has proceeded.
Presumably, he will be taking the
oath of office shortly, and become

the 36th President of the United
States.

There are sounds of shock, muttering, some sobbing in the restaurant. Lou gulps down his drink. Jim sits stunned.

JIM

I didn't always agree with him - too
liberal for my tastes - but I
respected him.	He had style... God,

I'm ashamed to be an American today.

He holds back the tears.	The food comes.	Lou waves it off.
They just sit there.

EXTERIOR KATZENJAMMER'S BAR - SAME DAY(1963)

Katzenjammer's is an Irish working class bar across Canal St. In a seedy area near the Mississippi River, just off Lafayette Square.
 

INTERIOR KATZENJAMMER'S BAR - SAME DAY(1963)

A variety of loud Irish working men sit on stools watching the TV. There are a few formica tables with chairs against the walls, and an unused pool table.

NEWSMAN 2

Many arrests have been made here
today.	Anyone looking even remotely
suspicious is being detained.	Most

of the crowd has gone home but there
are still many stunned people
wandering around in Dealey Plaza
unable to comprehend what happened
here earlier today.

On the TV, we see the scene at Dealey Plaza. The reporter has several men, women, and children gathered around him. He puts his microphone in their faces.

BLACK WOMAN
(crying)

It's all so terrible.	I jes' can't
stop crying.	He did so much for
this country, for colored people.

Why?

MAN
(Bill Newman, with
wife and kids)

I grabbed my kids and wife and hit
the ground.	The bullets were coming

over our heads - from that fence
back on the knoll - I was just so
shaken.	I saw his face when it hit...

he just, his ear flew off, he turned
just real white and then went stiff
like a board and flopped over on his
stomach, with his foot sticking out.

CUT TO the picket fence above the Grassy Knoll.

WOMAN 2
I thought... it came from up there,
that building.

CUT TO the Book Depository.

MAN 2
I heard shots from over there.

CUT TO the County Records Building.

NEWSMAN 2
How many shots?
 

WOMAN 3
About 3 to 4... I don't know.

MAN 3
I never thought it could happen in

America.

Back in the bar, the camera moves to two patrons seated at a table by themselves, far enough away not to be heard. Guy Banister is a sturdy, imposing ex - FBI agent in his 60's, steel gray hair, blue eyes, ruddy from heavy drinking. He wears a small rosebud in his lapel. Jack Martin is a thin, mousy man in his mid - 50's, wearing a Dick Tracy hat.

They're both drinking Wild Turkey heavily. The TV blares loudly across the room over their voices.

BANISTER
All this blubbering over that
sonofabitch!	They're grieving like

they knew the man.	It makes me want
to puke.

MARTIN
God's sake, chief.	The President

was shot.

BANISTER
A bullshit President!	I don't see
any weeping for all the thousands of

Cubans that bastard condemned to
death and torture at the Bay of Pigs.

Where are all the tears for the
Russians and Hungarians and Chinese
living like slaves in prison camps

run by Kennedy's communist buddies -
All these damned peace treaties!
I'm telling ya Jack, that's what
happens when you let the niggers
vote.	They get together with the

Jews and the Catholics and elect an
Irish bleeding heart.

MARTIN
Chief, maybe you had a little too

much to drink.

BANISTER
Bullshit!
(yells across the

room)
Bartender, another round...
(finishes drink)
Here's to the New Frontier.	Camelot
in smithereens.	I'll drink to that.
 

NAPOLEON'S RESTAURANT - DAY(1963)

Several hours have elapsed. The clientele has grown, drinking, watching the tube with the insatiable curiosity the event engendered. People stare in from the street... There is a silence in the restaurant.

TELEVISION INSERT: image of a Dallas policeman hauling a Mannlicher - Carcano rifle with a sniperscope over the heads of the press gathered in the police station.

NEWSMAN 3

This is the rifle, it is a Mannlicher - Carcano Italian rifle, a powerful World War II military gun used by infantry and highly accurate at distances of 100 yards.

We see images of the textbook boxes - the sniper's nest in the sixth story of the Book Depository - and then the view out the window looking down at Elm Street.

NEWSMAN 3
The assassin apparently fired from
this perch... but so far no word,

much confusion and...

CUT TO Newsman 2 at a different location or in studio.

NEWSMAN 4

A flash bulletin... the Dallas Police
have just announced they have a

suspect in the killing of a Dallas
police officer, J.D. Tippit, who was
shot at 1:15 in Oak Cliff, a suburb

of Dallas.

Police are saying there could be a tie - in here to the murder of the President.

TELEVISION INSERT: Lee Harvey Oswald, a bruise over his right temple, is apprehended at the Texas Theatre.

NEWSMAN 4
The suspect, identified as Lee Harvey

Oswald, was arrested by more than a
dozen police officers after a short

scuffle at the Texas movie theatre
in Oak Cliff, several blocks from
where Officer Tippit was killed,

apparently with a .38 revolver found
on Oswald.	There is apparently at
least one eyewitness.

TELEVISION INSERT: Oswald is booked at the station. A surly young man, 24, he claims to the press:
 

TV OSWALD

No, I don't know what I'm charged
with... I don't know what dispatches
you people have been given, but I

emphatically deny these charges.

VOICE FROM THE BAR
They oughta just shoot the bastard.

The room bursts out with an accumulated fury at the young Oswald - a tremendous release of tension. On the TV we see the excitement in the newsmen's eyes; they all sense that this is the break they're looking for in the case.

Garrison and Ivon watch the TV, and then Garrison stands and pays the bill.

LOU
One little guy with a cheap rifle -

look what he can do.

JIM
Let's get outta here, Lou.	I saw
too much stuff like this in the war.

As they leave, the camera holds on the image of Oswald.

MISSISSIPPI RIVER WATERFRONT - TWILIGHT(1963)

The sun is setting through thunderheads over the Mississippi River waterfront as Banister and Martin wobble out, drunk, down the street.

BANISTER

Well, the kid musta gone nuts, right?
(Martin says nothing,
looks troubled)
I said Oswald must've flipped.	Just
did this crazy thing before anyone

could stop him, right?

MARTIN
I think I'll cut out here, chief.	I
gotta get home.

BANISTER

(strong-arms Martin)
Get home my ass.	We're going to the
office, have another drink.	I want

some company tonight.

BANISTER'S OFFICE - NIGHT(1963)

Rain pours down outside 531 Lafayette Street as Banister opens several locks on the door and turns on the lights.
 

The frosted glass on the door says "W. Guy Banister Associates, Inc., Investigators." It's a typical detective's office with spare desks, simple chairs, large filing cabinets and cubicles in the rear.

BANISTER
(repetitive)

Who'd ever thought that goofy Oswald
kid would pull off a stunt like an
assassination?

(Martin waits)
Just goes to show, you can never
know about some people.	Am I right,
Jack?
(Martin, frightened

now, doesn't reply)
Well, bless my soul.	Your eyes are

as red as two cherries, Jack.	Don't
tell me we have another bleeding
heart here.	Hell, all these years I

thought you were on my side.

MARTIN
Chief, sometimes I don't know whether
you're kidding or not.

BANISTER

I couldn't be more serious, Jack.
Those big red eyes have me wondering
about your loyalty.

Banister, going to a file cabinet to get a bottle out, notices one of the file drawers is slightly ajar. He flies into a rage.

BANISTER
Who the hell opened my files!	You've

been looking through my private files,
haven't you, you weasel?

MARTIN
You may not like this, chief, but

you're beginning to act paranoid.	I
mean, you really are.

BANISTER
You found out about Dave Ferrie going

to Texas today and you went through
all my files to see what was going
on.	You're a goddamn spy.

MARTIN

(angry)
Goddammit chief, why would I ever
need to look in your files?	I saw

enough here this summer to write a
 

book.

BANISTER
I always lock my files.	And you
were the only one here today...

(stops as he hears
Martin)
What do you mean, you son of a bitch?

MARTIN

You know what I mean.	I saw a lot
of strange things going on in this
office this summer.	And a lotta
strange people.

Enraged, Banister pulls a .357 Magnum from his holster, cursing as he suddenly slams it into Martin's temple. The smaller man crumples painfully to the ground.

BANISTER

You didn't see a goddamn thing, you
little weasel.	Do you get it?	You
didn't see a goddamn thing.

JIM GARRISON'S HOME - THAT NIGHT(1963)

Jim and his wife, Liz, watch the television. She is in her early 30's, an attractive, quiet southern woman from Louisiana. They live in a spacious two-story wood house, suburban in feel.

TELEVISION IMAGE: Reporters are jammed in the Assembly Room

of the Dallas Police Headquarters as Oswald is brought through the corridor, officers on either side of him.

NEWSMAN 5
(over the din)

Did you shoot the President?

TV OSWALD

I didn't shoot anybody, no sir.	I'm
just a patsy.

The camera moves onto Jim with Liz and the children - Jasper, the oldest at 4, holds his dad's hand. On Liz's lap, Snapper, the youngest, is asleep. Virginia, the 2-year-old, is pestering the Boxer dog... and Mattie, the heavyset black housekeeper, 35, is in tears.

LIZ

My god, he sure looks like a creep.
What's he talkin' 'bout... a patsy?

TELEVISION IMAGE: Oswald in front of the cameras, on a platform.
 

TV OSWALD
Well, I was questioned by a judge.

However, I protested at the time
that I was not allowed legal
representation during that very short

and sweet hearing.	Uh, I really
don't know what the situation is
about.	Nobody has told me anything
except that I am accused of, uh,
murdering a policeman.	I know nothing

more than that and I do request that
someone come forward to give me, uh,
legal assistance.

NEWSMAN 5

Did you kill the President?

TV OSWALD
No.	I have not been charged with
that.	In fact nobody has said that

to me yet.	The first thing I heard
about it was when the newspaper
reporters in the hall, uh, asked me
that question.

NEWSMAN 6
You have been charged.

TV OSWALD
Sir?

NEWSMAN 6

You have been charged.

Oswald seems shocked.

NEWSMAN 5

Were you ever in the Free Cuba
Movement or whatever the...

RUBY
(a voice in the back)

It was the Fair Play for Cuba
Committee.

Oswald looks over and spots Ruby in the back of the room, on a table. Recognition is in his eyes. The police start to move him out.

NEWSMAN 6

What did you do in Russia?	What
happened to your eye?

TV OSWALD
A policeman hit me.
 

GARRISON
He seems pretty cool to me for a man

under pressure like that.

LIZ

Icy, you mean.
(shudders)
He gives me the willies... come on
sugarplums, it's past your bedtimes...
(to Jim)

Come on, let's go upstairs.
(rises)
Mattie - get ahold of yourself.

MATTIE

Why, Mr. Jim?	He was a great man,
Mr. Jim, a great man...

Jim is moved by her.

TELEVISION IMAGE: Texas D.A. Henry Wade addresses the journalists.

TV WADE
There is no one else but him.	He

has been charged in the Supreme Court
with murder with malice.	We're gonna
ask for the death penalty.

Jim moves to the phone as Liz starts the kids up the stairs. The TV cuts to stills of Oswald's life. Two newsmen sit in a studio, smoking, sharing information.

FRANK
(Newsman 7)

So several hours after the
assassination, a disturbed portrait
is emerging of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Described as shy and introverted, he
spent much of his childhood in New

Orleans, Louisiana and went to high
school there.	After a stint in the
Marines, he apparently became
fascinated by Communism and in 1959
defected to the Soviet Union.

BOB

(Newsman 8)
He married a Russian woman there,
Frank, had a child, and then returned

to the United States after 30 months.
But he is still believed to be a
dedicated Marxist and a fanatical
supporter of Fidel Castro and ultra
left wing causes.	He spent last

summer in New Orleans and was arrested
 

in a brawl with anti-Castro Cuban
exiles.

FRANK
(Newsman 7)

And apparently, Bob, Oswald had been
passing out pro-Castro pamphlets for
an organization called Fair Play for
Cuba, a Communist front he reportedly
belongs to.

BOB

(Newsman 8)

And we have Marina Oswald, his Russian-born wife, who has identified the rifle found in the Book Depository as belonging to her husband. And we

have...

TELEVISION IMAGES: Kennedy's casket coming off the plane in Washington D.C. play under the newsman... Jackie stands there in her blood-spotted dress... we cut to the photograph of L.B.J. taking the oath of office earlier that day... and a still photo of Robert Kennedy's reaction...

JIM
(on the phone)

Lou, I'm sorry to disturb you this
late...	yeah, matter of routine but
we better get on this New Orleans

connection of Oswald's right away.
Check out his record, find any friends

or associates from last summer.
Let's meet with the senior assistants
and investigators day after tomorrow,

Sunday, yeah, at 11... Thanks Lou.

GARRISON CONFERENCE ROOM - 2 DAYS LATER - DAY(1963)

Jim is with his key players: Lou Ivon, chief investigator; Susie Cox, in her 30's, and efficient, attractive Assistant D.A.; La Oser, Assistant D.A. in his 40's, serious, spectacled; Bill Broussard, Assistant D.A., handsome, volatile, in his 30's; Numa Bertell, D.A. in his 30's, chubby and friendly, and several others. They sit around a conference table with a black-and-white portable TV on a side table showing the current Sunday, November 24 news from Dallas.

MARINA OSWALD

(on TV)
Lee good man... he not shoot anyone.

Camera moves to Lou Ivon, looking at paperwork.

LOU
 

As far as Oswald's associates, boss,
the one name that keeps popping up

is David Ferrie.

Oswald was seen with him several times last summer.

JIM

I know David - a strange character.

LOU

He's been in trouble before.	Used
to be a hot shot pilot for Eastern
Airlines, but he got canned after an
alleged homosexual incident with a
14-year old boy.

BILL

(on phone, excited)
Get Kohlman... he told somebody the
Texas trip... yesterday mentioned to

somebody about Ferrie... find it
out.

On the TV we see the first image of the "backyard photos" of Lee Harvey Oswald holding the rifle.

NEWSMAN 1

These backyard photos were found
yesterday among Oswald's possessions
in the garage of Janet William's

home in Riving, Texas, where Marina
Oswald and her children are living.

The picture apparently was taken
earlier this year.	Police say the
rifle, a cheap World War II Italian-

made Mannlicher-Carcano, was ordered
from a Chicago mailing house and
shipped to Oswald's alias A. Hidell
at a post office box in March, 1963.
This is the same rifle that was used

to assassinate the President.

The camera moves back to the staff, who watch, obviously influenced.

COX
That ties it up...

NUMA
Another nut.	Jesus, anybody can get

a rifle in Texas.

BILL
(hangs up)
So it seems that Dave Ferrie drove

off on a Friday afternoon for Texas -
 

a source told Kohlman he might have
been a getaway pilot for Oswald.

Members of the team exchange looks of surprise and disbelief.

JIM
Hold your horses.	What kinda source?

BILL
(grins)

The anonymous kind, Chief.

OSER
I think I remember this guy Ferrie
speaking at a meeting of some

veteran's group.	Ranting against
Castro.	Extreme stuff.

NEWSMAN 1
We go back now to the basement of

police headquarters where they're
about to transfer Oswald to County
Prison...

TELEVISION IMAGE: The basement of the Dallas police headquarters - waiting. Men mill around as Oswald is led

out of the basement by two deputies. Jack Ruby rushes forward out of the crowd - and into history - putting his sealing bullet into Oswald. Total chaos erupts...

The camera is on the staff, looking.	We hear gasps.

ANNOUNCER
He's been shot!	Oswald's been shot!

VARIOUS VOICES
Goddamn!	Look at that... Look at

that... I don't believe this... Right
on TV!	What is going on?	Who is
this guy... oh Jesus.

Jim is silent.

LOU
Seventy cops in that basement.	What

the hell were they doing?

NEWSMAN 1
Jack Ruby... Who is Jack Ruby?	Oswald
is hurt.

We see images of Oswald being lifted onto the stretcher, into the ambulance, and the newscaster crouching, whispering. Everybody in the room is stunned still.

LOU
 

Well, no trial now.	Looks like
somebody saved the Dallas D.A. a

pile of work.

They look to Jim.	There's a pause.	He is deeply disturbed.

JIM

(quietly)
Well, let's get Ferrie in here anyway.

GARRISON OFFICE - NEXT DAY - DAY(1963)

The portable television plays to Jim alone, sitting in his chair smoking a pipe. We see searing images of the funeral - crowds of mourners, the casket being driven through the streets, the honor guards, the horses, the dignitaries walking behind, Jackie veiled... the faces of De Gaulle, MacMillan, Robert Kennedy. We intercut briefly to Lyndon Johnson sitting down earlier that day with the Joint Chiefs of Staff... and then a future cut to Johnson in the Oval Office (staged).

The shots are very tight, uncomfortable - noses, eyes, hands - very tight.

As the door opens following a knock, David Ferrie is brought into Jim's office by two police officers and Lou Ivon. Jim stands up, cordial.

LOU
Chief... David Ferrie.

Ferrie suffers from alopecia, a disease that has removed all his body hair, and he looks like a Halloween character - penciled eyebrows, one higher than the other, a scruffy reddish wig pasted on askew with glue, thrift store clothing. His eyes, however, are swift and cunning, his smile warm, inviting itself, his demeanor hungry to please.

JIM
(shakes hands)
Come in, Dave.	Have a seat, make

yourself comfortable.	Coffee?

FERRIE
Do you remember me, Mr. Garrison?	I
met you on Carondolet Street right

after your election.	I congratulated
you, remember?

JIM
How could I forget?	You make quite

a first impression.
(on intercom)
Sharon, could you please bring us
some coffee?
(Ferrie laughs; pause)

I've heard over the years you're
 

quite a first-rate pilot, Dave.
Legend has it you can get in and out

of any field, no matter how small...
(Jim points to the
pictures on his wall)

I'm a bit of a pilot myself, you
know.	Flew grasshoppers for the
field artillery in the war.

Ferrie glimpses the low-volumed TV - and images of the funeral. He looks away, jittery, and takes out a cigarette. Sharon brings the coffee in.
