1. Apply the rules of normalization to the class diagram 
to check the diagram for processing effi ciency.
 2. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database.
J. For the A Video Store problem in Chapter 4 (exercises 
L, M, and N), Chapter 5 (exercises R and S), Chapter 
6 (exercise E), Chapter 7 (exercise B), and Chapter 8 
(exercise B):
 1. Apply the rules of normalization to the class 
 diagram to check the diagram for processing 
 effi ciency.
 2. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database.
K. For the gym membership problem in Chapter 4 (exer cises O, P, and Q), Chapter 5 (exercises T and U), 
Chapter 6 (exercise F), Chapter 7 (exercise C), and 
Chapter 8 (exercise C):
 1. Apply the rules of normalization to the class 
 diagram to check the diagram for processing 
 effi ciency.
 2. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database.
L. For the Picnics R Us problem in Chapter 4 (exercises 
R, S, and T), Chapter 5 (exercises V and W), Chapter 
6 (exercise G), Chapter 7 (exercise D), and Chapter 8 
(exercise D):
 1. Apply the rules of normalization to the class diagram 
to check the diagram for processing effi ciency.
 2. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database.
M. For the Of-the-Month-Club problem in Chapter 4 
(exercises U, V, and W), Chapter 5 (exercises X and 
Y), Chapter 6 (exercise H), Chapter 7 (exercise E), and 
Chapter 8 (exercise E):
 1. Apply the rules of normalization to the class dia gram to check the diagram for processing effi ciency.
 2. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database.
MINICASES
1. Th e system development team at the Wilcon Company 
is working on developing a new customer order entry 
system. In the process of designing the new system, the 
team has identifi ed the following class and its attributes:
 Inventory Order
 Order Number (PK)
 Order Date
 Customer Name
 Street Address
 City
 State
 Zip
 Customer Type
 Initials
 District Number
 Region Number
 1 to 22 occurrences of:
 Item Name
 Quantity Ordered
 Item Unit
 Quantity Shipped
 Item Out
 Quantity Received
 a. State the rule that is applied to place a class in fi rst 
normal form. Based on the above class, create a 
class diagram that will be in 1NF.
 b. State the rule that is applied to place a class into 
second normal form. Revise the class diagram for 
the Wilcon Company using the class and attributes 
described (if necessary) to place it in 2NF.
 c. State the rule that is applied to place a class into 
third normal form. Revise the class diagram to 
place it in 3NF.
 d. When planning for the physical design of this data base, can you identify any likely situations where 
the project team might choose to denormalize the 
366 Chapter 9 Data Management Layer Design
class diagram? Aft er going through the work of 
normalizing, why would this be considered?
2. In the new system under development for Holiday 
Travel Vehicles, seven tables will be implemented in 
the new relational database. Th ese tables are: New 
Vehicle, Trade-in Vehicle, Sales Invoice, Customer, 
Salesperson, Installed Option, and Option. Th e 
expected average record size for these tables and the 
initial record count per table are given here.
Average Initial Table 
Table Name Record Size Size (records)
New Vehicle 65 characters 10,000
Trade-in Vehicle 48 characters 7,500
Sales Invoice 76 characters 16,000
Customer 61 characters 13,000
Salesperson 34 characters 100
Installed Option 16 characters 25,000
Option 28 characters 500
 Perform a volumetrics analysis for the Holiday 
Travel Vehicle system. Assume that the DBMS that 
will be used to implement the system requires 35 per cent overhead to be factored into the estimates. Also, 
assume a growth rate for the company of 10 percent 
per year. Th e systems development team wants to 
ensure that adequate hardware is obtained for the next 
three years.
3. Refer to the Professional and Scientifi c Staff Manage ment (PSSM) minicase in Chapters 4, 6, 7, and 8.
 a. Apply the rules of normalization to the class 
diagram to check the diagram for processing 
effi ciency.
 b. Develop a clustering and indexing strategy for this 
model. Describe how your strategy will improve 
the performance of the database
