this when checking out online. The customer service representative might do this 
when talking to a customer on the phone. The store sales representative might 
do this when dealing with the customer in a store. Only a member of management can process an account adjustment. The other use cases are included only 
for the customer.
There are many ways to organize use case diagrams for communicating with 
users, stakeholders, and project team members. One way is to show all use cases 
invoked by a particular actor (i.e., from the user’s viewpoint). This approach is 
often used during requirements definition because the systems analyst may be 
working with a particular user and identifying all the functions that user performs with the system. Figure 3-13 illustrates this viewpoint, showing all the 
use cases involving the customer for the Sales subsystem. Figure 3-14 shows use 
cases involving the customer service representative and the store sales representative for the Sales subsystem. Analysts can expand this approach to include all 
the use cases invoked by any department, regardless of the subsystem, or all use 
cases important to a specific stakeholder.
❚ «includes» Relationships
Frequently during the development of a use case diagram, it becomes apparent that 
one use case might use the services of another use case. For example, in the Sales 
subsystem use case diagram shown in Figure 3-14, the customer might search 
Search for item
Sales Subsystem
Actor: Customer
Fill reserve cart
Empty reserve
cart
Empty shopping
cart
View product
comments and
ratings
View accessory
combinations
Check out shopping
cart
Fill shopping cart
Convert reserve
cart
Customer
Figure 3-13 All use cases 
involving the customer actor for 
the Sales subsystem
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
86 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
for an item, view product comments and ratings, and view accessory combinations before beginning to fill the shopping cart. However, while filling the shopping cart, the customer might also search for an item, view product comments, 
and view accessories. Therefore, one use case uses, or “includes,” another use 
case. Figure 3-15 shows a use case diagram emphasizing this aspect of use cases. 
Customer
Search for item
Fill shopping cart
View product
comments and
ratings
View accessory
combinations
Sales Subsystem
Fill Shopping Cart <<includes>> Relationships
«includes»
«includes»
«includes»
Figure 3-15 A use case diagram 
of the Fill shopping cart «includes» 
relationships
Sales Subsystem
Actors: Service Representative and Store Representative
Customer service
representative
Store sales
representative
View product
comments and
ratings
View accessory
combinations
Create phone sale
Search for item
Create store sale
Figure 3-14 Use cases involving the customer service representative and store sales representative for the Sales subsystem© Cengage Learning®
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 3 ■ Identifying User Stories and Use Cases 87
Fill shopping cart also includes Search for item, View product comments and 
ratings, and View accessory combinations. Thus, the Customer can view comments initially, and also while carrying out the Fill shopping cart use case. The 
relationship between these use cases is denoted by the dashed connecting line 
with the arrow that points to the use case that is included. The relationship is 
read Fill shopping cart includes Search for item. Sometimes, this relationship is 
referred to as the «includes» relationship or the «uses» relationship. Note that 
the word includes is enclosed within guillemets in the diagram; this is the way to 
refer to a stereotype in UML. It means that the relationship between one use case 
and another use case is a stereotypical «includes» relationship.
■ Developing a Use Case Diagram
Analysts create a variety of use case diagrams to communicate with users, 
stakeholders, management, and team members. The steps to develop use case 
diagrams are:
1. Identify all the stakeholders and users who would benefit by having a use 
case diagram.
2. Determine what each stakeholder or user needs to review in a use case diagram. Typically, a use case diagram might be produced for each subsystem, 
for each type of user, for use cases with the «includes» relationship, and for 
use cases that are of interest to specific stakeholders.
3. For each potential communication need, select the use cases and actors to 
show and draw the use case diagram. There are many software packages 
that can be used to draw use case diagrams.
4. Carefully name each use case diagram and then note how and when the 
diagram should be used to review use cases with stakeholders and users.
«includes» relationship a relationship 
between use cases in which one use case 
is stereotypically included within the other 
use case
chapter Summary
This chapter is the first of three chapters that present 
techniques for modeling a system’s functional requirements. A key early step in the modeling process is to 
identify and list the user stories or use cases that define the functional requirements for the system. User 
stories are written by end users and stakeholders during requirements meetings with the developers. They 
are used with most highly Agile development methodologies. Use cases are very similar to user stories, 
but they are often modeled in more detail than user 
stories and are the responsibility of the developers. Use 
cases can be identified by using the user goal technique 
and the event decomposition technique. The user goal 
technique initially identifies types of system end users, called actors. Then, users are asked to list specific 
user goals they have when using the system to support 
their work. The event decomposition technique initially identifies events that require a response from the 
system. An event is something that can be described, 
something that occurs at a specific time and place, and 
something worth remembering. External events occur 
outside the system—usually triggered by someone who 
interacts with the system. Temporal events occur at a 
defined point in time, such as the end of a work day or 
the end of every month. State or internal events occur 
based on an internal system change. For each event, 
a use case is identified and named. The event decomposition technique helps ensure that each use case is 
identified at the elementary business process (EBP) 
level of detail. Each use case identified by the analyst 
is further documented by a brief use case description 
and by identifying the actors. UML use case diagrams 
are drawn to document use cases and their actors. 
Many different use case diagrams are drawn based on 
the need to review use cases with various stakeholders, 
users, and team members.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
88 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
event
event decomposition technique
external event
«includes» relationship
perfect technology assumption
state event
system controls
temporal event
use case
use case diagram
user goal technique
user story
acceptance criteria
actor
automation boundary
brief use case description
elementary business 
process (EBP)
Key Terms
1. What are the five activities of systems analysis, 
and which activity is discussed beginning with 
this chapter?
2. What is a user story? What is a use case?
3. What are the two techniques used to identify 
use cases?
4. Describe the user goal technique for identifying 
use cases.
5. What are some examples of users with different 
functional roles and at different operational levels?
6. What are some examples of use case names that 
correspond to your goals as a student going 
through the college registration process? Be sure 
to use the verb-noun naming convention.
7. What is the overarching objective of asking users 
about their specific goals?
8. How many types of users can have the same user 
goals for using the system?
9. Describe the event decomposition technique for 
identifying use cases.
10. Why is the event decomposition technique 
considered more comprehensive than the user 
goal technique?
11. What is an elementary business process (EBP)?
12. Explain how the event decomposition technique 
helps identify use cases at the right level of analysis.
13. What is an event?
14. What are the three types of events?
15. Define an external event and give an example 
that applies to a checking account system.
16. Define a temporal event and give an example 
that applies to a checking account system.
17. What are system controls, and why are they 
not considered part of the users’ functional 
requirements?
18. What is the perfect technology assumption?
19. What are three examples of events that involve 
system controls that should not be included initially because of the perfect technology assumption?
20. What is a brief use case description?
21. What is UML?
22. What is the purpose of UML use case 
diagrams?
23. What is another name for “actor” in UML, and 
how is it represented on a use case diagram?
24. What is the automation boundary on a use case 
diagram, and how is it represented?
25. How many actors can be related to a use case on 
a use case diagram?
26. Why might a systems analyst draw many different use case diagrams when reviewing use cases 
with end users?
27. What is the «includes» relationship between two 
use cases?
Review Questions
Problems and Exercises
1. Consider the situation where a student 
organization is exploring its requirements for 
a system that manages its membership and 
finances. Based on what you know about student organizations, write user stories using the 
standard template for the following potential 
users: membership director, finance director, 
faculty advisor. Add acceptance criteria for each 
user story based on how you imagine the system 
might work.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 3 ■ Identifying User Stories and Use Cases 89
2. Review the external event checklist in Figure 3-4 
and then think about a university course registration system. What is an example of an event of 
each type in the checklist? Name each event by 
using the guidelines for naming an external event.
3. Review the temporal event checklist in Figure 3-5. 
Would a student grade report be an internal or 
external output? Would a class list for the instructor be an internal or external output? What are 
some other internal and external outputs for a 
course registration system? Using the guidelines 
for naming temporal events, what would you 
name the events that trigger these outputs?
4. Consider the following sequence of actions taken 
by a customer at a bank. Which action is the 
event the analyst should define for a bank account transaction processing system? (1) Kevin 
gets a check from Grandma for his birthday. 
(2) Kevin wants a car. (3) Kevin decides to save 
his money. (4) Kevin goes to the bank. (5) Kevin 
waits in line. (6) Kevin makes a deposit in his savings account. (7) Kevin grabs the deposit receipt. 
(8) Kevin asks for a brochure on auto loans.
5. Consider the perfect technology assumption, 
which states that use cases should be included 
during analysis only if the system would be 
required to respond under perfect conditions. 
Could any of the use cases listed for the RMO 
CSMS be eliminated based on this assumption? 
Explain. Why are such use cases as Log on to the 
system and Back up the database required only 
under imperfect conditions?
6. Visit some Web sites of car manufacturers, such 
as Honda, BMW, Toyota, and Acura. Many of 
these sites have a use case that is typically named 
Build and price a car. As a potential customer, 
you can select a car model, select features and 
options, and get the car’s suggested price and list 
of specifications. Write a brief use case description for this use case (see Figure 3-9).
7. Again looking at a Web site for one of the car 
manufacturers, consider yourself a potential 
buyer and then identify all the use cases included 
on the site that correspond to your goals.
8. Set up a meeting with a librarian. During your 
meeting, ask the librarian to describe the situations that the book checkout system needs to 
respond to. List these external events. Now ask 
about points in time, or deadlines, that require 
the system to produce a statement, notice, report, 
or other output. List these temporal events. Does 
it seem natural for the librarian to describe the 
system in this way? List each event and then 
name the resulting use case.
9. Again considering the library, ask some students 
what their goals are in using the library system. 
Also ask some library employees about their 
goals in using the system. Name these goals as use 
cases (verb-noun) and discuss whether student 
users have different goals than employee users.
10. Visit a restaurant or the college food service to 
talk to a server (or talk with a friend who is a 
food server). Ask about the external events and 
temporal events, as you did in exercise 8. What 
are the events and resulting use cases for order 
processing at a restaurant?
11. Review the procedures for course registration 
at your university and then talk with the staff 
in advising, in registration, and in your major 
department. Think about the sequence that goes 
on over an entire semester. What are the events 
that students trigger? What are the events that 
your own department triggers? What are the 
temporal events that result in information going 
to students? What are the temporal events that 
result in information going to instructors or 
departments? List all the events and the resulting 
use cases that should be included in the system.
12. Refer to the RMO CSMS Order Fulfillment subsystem shown in Figure 3-10. Draw a use case diagram 
that shows all actors and all use cases. Use a drawing tool such as Microsoft Visio if it is available.
13. Again for the Order Fulfillment subsystem, draw 
a use case diagram showing just the use cases 
for the Shipping Department in preparation for 
a meeting with them about the system requirements. Use a drawing tool such as Microsoft 
Visio if it is available.
14. Refer to the RMO CSMS Marketing subsystem 
shown in Figure 3-10. Draw a use case diagram 
that shows all actors and all use cases. Use a drawing tool such as Microsoft Visio if it is available.
15. Refer to the RMO CSMS Reporting subsystem 
shown in Figure 3-10. These reports were identified by asking users about temporal events, 
meaning points in time that require the system 
to produce information of value. In most actual 
systems today, an actor is assigned responsibility for producing the reports or other outputs 
when they are due. Recall that the actor is part 
of the system—the manual, nonautomated 
part. Thus, this is one way the “system” can be 
responsible for producing an output at a point 
in time. In the future, more outputs will be produced automatically. Draw a use case diagram 
that shows the use cases and actors, as shown in 
Figure 3-10. Use a drawing tool such as Microsoft Visio if it is available.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
90 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
The State Patrol Ticket-Processing 
System
The purpose of the State Patrol ticket-processing system is 
to record moving violations, keep records of the fines paid by 
drivers when they plead guilty or are found guilty of moving 
violations, and notify the court that a warrant for arrest should 
be issued when such fines are not paid in a timely manner. 
A separate State Patrol system records accidents and the 
verification of financial responsibility (insurance). But a third 
system uses ticket and accident records to produce driving 
record reports for insurance companies. Finally, a fourth system issues, renews, or suspends driver’s licenses. These 
four systems are obviously integrated, in that they share access to the same database; otherwise, they are operated 
separately by different departments of the State Patrol.
When an officer gives a ticket to a driver, a copy of 
the ticket is turned in and entered into the system. A new 
ticket record is created, and relationships to the correct 
driver, officer, and court are established in the database. 
If the driver pleads guilty, he or she mails in the fine in a 
preprinted envelope with the ticket number on it. In some 
cases, the driver claims innocence and wants a court date. 
When the envelope is returned without a check and the trial 
request box has an “X” in it, the system does the following: 
notes the plea on the ticket record; looks up driver, ticket, 
and officer information; and sends a ticket details report 
to the appropriate court. A trial date questionnaire form is 
also produced at the same time and is mailed to the driver. 
The instructions on the questionnaire tell the driver to fill in 
convenient dates and mail the questionnaire directly to the 
court. Upon receiving this information, the court schedules 
a trial date and notifies the driver of the date and time.
When the trial is completed, the court sends the 
verdict to the ticketing system. The verdict and trial date 
are recorded for the ticket. If the verdict is innocent, the 
system that produces driving record reports for insurance 
companies will ignore the ticket. If the verdict is guilty, 
the court gives the driver another envelope with the ticket 
number on it for mailing in the fine.
If the driver fails to pay the fine within the required 
period, the ticket-processing system produces a warrant 
request notice and sends it to the court. This happens if 
the driver does not return the original envelope within two 
weeks, or does not return the court-supplied envelope 
within two weeks of the trial date. What happens next is 
in the hands of the court. Sometimes, the court requests 
that the driver’s license be suspended, and the system that 
processes driver’s licenses handles the suspension.
1. To what events must the ticket-processing system 
respond? List each event, the type of event, the 
resulting use case, and the actor(s). Think carefully 
about who the actors are. Does the officer directly 
enter the ticket into the system? Or does a state patrol clerk do it when the paper ticket is received from 
the officer? The existing system uses paper forms, so 
for now assume the state patrol clerk enters all of the 
information. A new system would use the same use 
cases, but opportunities for efficiency and accuracy 
would lead to changes in who the actors are.
2. Write a brief use case description for each use case.
3. Draw a use case diagram for the ticket-processing 
system assuming the actors are based on your 
answers in question 1 (the existing system as 
described).
CASE STUDY
Community Board of Realtors®
One of the functions of the Board of Realtors introduced in Chapter 2 is to provide a Multiple Listing 
Service (MLS) system that supplies information that 
local real estate agents use to help them sell houses to 
their customers. Agents list houses for sale (listings) by 
contracting with homeowners. The agent works for 
a real estate office, which sends information on the 
listing to the MLS. Therefore, any agent in the community can get information on the listing.
The MLS systems include lots of information on 
a listing. It is now common to include dozens of photos, video tours, Google map information, prior sales, 
and so forth. For now, let’s keep it simple and assume 
a listing includes the address, year built, square feet, 
Running Case Studies
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 3 ■ Identifying User Stories and Use Cases 91
number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, owner 
name, owner phone number, asking price, and status 
code. An agent will directly request information from 
the MLS system on listings that match customer requirements. Information is provided on the house, on 
the agent who listed the house, and on the real estate 
office for which the agent works. This information is 
needed because an agent might want to call the listing 
agent to ask additional questions or call the homeowner 
directly to make an appointment to show the house. 
Although it seems dated, once each week, the MLS 
produces a listing booklet that contains information 
on all listings. These booklets are sent to some real estate agents because many think they are easier to flip 
through and write on. Sometimes, agents and owners 
decide to change information about a listing, such as reducing the price, correcting previous information on the 
house, or indicating that the house is sold. The agent 
updates the information directly on the MLS system.
1. To what events must the MLS system respond 
based on the description above? List each event, 
the type of event, and the resulting use case. Be 
sure to consider all the use cases that would be 
needed to maintain the data in the MLS system.
2. Draw a use case diagram based on the use cases 
you identified in question 1. Include appropriate 
actors based on the case description.
The Spring Breaks ‘R’ Us Travel Service
Spring Breaks ‘R’ Us (SBRU), introduced in Chapter 2, 
includes many use cases that make up the functional 
requirements. Consider the following description of the 
Booking subsystem. A few weeks before Thanksgiving 
break, it is time to open the system to new bookings. 
Students usually want to browse through the resorts 
and do some planning. When a student or group of 
students wants to book a trip, the system allows it. 
Sometimes, a student needs to be added or dropped 
from the group or a group changes size and needs a 
different type of room. One month before the actual 
trip, it is time for the system to send out final payment 
requirement notices. Students cancel the booking or 
they pay their final bills. Students often want to look 
up their booking status and check on resort details. 
When they arrive at the resort, they need to check in; 
and when they leave, they need to check out.
1. Using the event decomposition technique for 
each event you identify in the description here, 
name the event, state the type of event, and 
name the resulting use case. Draw a use case 
diagram for these use cases.
2. Consider the new Social Networking subsystem 
that SBRU is researching that was described 
in Chapter 2. Think in terms of the user goal 
technique to identify as many use cases as you 
can think of that you would like to have in the 
system. SBRU is guessing you might want to 
join, send messages, and so forth, but there must 
be many interesting and useful things the system 
could do before, during, and after the trip. Draw 
a use case diagram for these use cases.
On the Spot Courier Services
Recall the On the Spot courier service introduced 
in Chapter 2. The details of the package pickup and 
delivery process are described here.
When Bill got an order, only on his phone at first, 
he recorded when he received the call and when the 
shipment would be ready for pickup. Sometimes, customers wanted immediate pickup; sometimes, they 
were calling to schedule a later time in the day for 
pickup.
Once he arrived at the pickup location, Bill 
collected the packages. It was not uncommon for 
the customer to have several packages for delivery. 
In addition to the name and address of the delivery 
location, he also recorded the time of pickup. He 
noted the desired delivery time, the location of the 
delivery, and the weight of the package to determine 
the courier cost. When he picked up the package, he 
printed out a label with his portable printer that he 
kept in the delivery van.
At first, Bill required customers to pay at the time 
of pickup, but he soon discovered that there were some 
regular customers who preferred to receive a monthly 
bill for all their shipments. He wanted to be able to accommodate those customers. Bills were due and payable upon receipt.
To help keep track of all the packages, Bill decided that he needed to scan each package as it was 
sorted in the warehouse. This would enable him to 
keep good control of his packages and avoid loss or 
delays.
The delivery of a package was fairly simple. Upon 
delivery, he would record information about when the 
delivery was made and who received it. Because some 
of the packages were valuable, it was necessary in 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
92 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
those instances to have someone sign for the package 
upon delivery.
1. From this description as well as the information 
from Chapter 2, identify all the actors who will 
be using the system.
2. Using the actors who you identified in question 1, 
develop a list of use cases based on the user goal 
technique. Draw a use case diagram for these 
use cases.
3. Using the event decomposition technique for 
each event you identify in the description 
here, name the event, state the type of event, 
and name the resulting use case. Draw a use 
case diagram for these use cases.
Sandia Medical Devices
Recall the Sandia Medical Devices Real-Time 
Glucose Monitoring (RTGM) system introduced in 
Chapter 2. As the project began, interviews with patients and physicians about potential RTGM capabilities and interaction modes identified several areas 
of concern that will need to be incorporated into the 
system requirements and design. The relevant patient 
concerns include:
■ Viewing and interpreting data and trends. 
Patients want to be able to view more than their 
current glucose level. They would like to see 
glucose levels over various time periods, with a 
specific focus on time periods during which their 
glucose was within and outside of acceptable 
ranges. A graphical view of the data is preferred, 
although some patients also want to be able to 
see actual numbers.
■ Entering additional data. Some patients want 
to be able to enter text notes or voice messages 
to supplement glucose level data. For example, 
patients who see a high glucose alert might 
record voice messages describing how they feel 
or what they had recently eaten. Some patients 
thought that sharing such information with 
their health-care providers might be valuable, 
but others only wanted such information for 
themselves.
Physicians expressed these concerns:
■ They do not want to be the “first line of 
response” to all alerts. They prefer that nurses 
or physician assistants be charged with that 
role and that physicians be notified only when 
frontline personnel determine that an emergency 
situation exists.
■ They want to be able to monitor and view past 
patient data and trends in much the same way as 
described for patients.
■ They want all their actions to be logged and for 
patient-specific responses to be stored as part of 
the patient’s electronic medical record.
Perform the following tasks by using the information here as well as the system description in 
Chapter 2:
1. Identify all the actors who will use RTGM.
2. Using the actors who you identified in question 1, 
develop a list of use cases based on the user goal 
technique. Draw a use case diagram for these use 
cases.
3. Using the event decomposition technique for 
each event you identified in the description, name 
the event, state the type of event, and name the 
resulting use case. Draw a use case diagram for 
these use cases.
Classic and more recent texts include the following:
Grady Booch, Ivar Jacobson, and James 
Rumbaugh, The Unified Modeling Language 
User Guide. Addison-Wesley, 1999.
Mike Cohn, User Stories Applied. Addison-Wesley, 
2004.
Craig Larman, Applying UML and Patterns (3rd ed.). 
Prentice Hall, 2005.
Stephen McMenamin and John Palmer, Essential 
Systems Analysis. Prentice Hall, 1984.
Ed Yourdon, Modern Structured Analysis. Prentice 
Hall, 1989Recall that Waiters on Call has been working with Sam 
Wells on the requirements for its meal-delivery system. 
Sue and Tom Bickford want a new system that will automate and improve their specialty business of providing 
customer-ordered, home-delivered meals prepared by a 
variety of local restaurants. Sam did a great job of identifying the use cases required for the delivery service, 
which impressed the Bickfords. And while working on 
the use cases, he continued to note all the business 
terms and concepts that the Bickfords used as they 
described their operations. He followed up with questions about the types of things they work with each day, 
which they answered.
“Based on what you’ve told me,” Sam said, 
“I assume you will need the system to store information about the following types of things, which 
we call data entities or domain classes: restaurants, 
menu items, customers, and orders. I also think you’re 
going to need to store information about the following 
types of things: drivers, addresses, routes, and order 
payments.”
The Bickfords readily agreed and added that it was 
important to know what route a restaurant was on and 
how far it might be to the customer’s address. They 
wanted drivers to be assigned to a route based on the 
distances from place to place.
“Yes, we need to decide how things need to be 
associated in the system,” Sam agreed. “Can you tell 
me if drivers pick up orders from several restaurants 
when they go out? Can you tell me how many items are 
usually included in one order? Do you note pickup times 
and delivery times? Do you need to plan the route so 
that hot dishes are delivered first?”
The Bickfords were further reassured that they had 
picked an analyst who was aware of the needs of their 
business.
problem domain the specific area 
(domain) of the user’s business need that is 
within the scope of the new system
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 4 ■ Domain Modeling 95
■ The Brainstorming Technique
As with use cases, an analyst should ask the users to discuss the types of things 
they work with routinely. The analyst can ask about several types of things to 
help identify them. Different types of things are important to different users, 
so it is important to involve all types of users to help identify problem domain 
things. The brainstorming technique is used to identify problem domain 
classes where developers work with users to identify different types of things 
that they use in their work.
Figure 4-1 shows some types of things to consider that can be used to systematically help users do brainstorming. Tangible things are often the most obvious, 
such as an airplane, a book, or a vehicle. In the Ridgeline Mountain Outfitters case, 
a product in the warehouse and a vehicle in the fleet are tangible things of importance. Another common type of thing in an information system is a role played by 
a person, such as an employee, a customer, a doctor, or a patient. The role of customer is obviously a very important one in the Ridgeline Mountain Outfitters case. 
Many things in the problem domain can fit into more than one type. For example, 
a vehicle might be thought of as a device and also a tangible thing. Either way, the 
important point is to identify potential things in the problem domain.
Other types of things can include organizational units, such as a division, department, or workgroup. Similarly, a site or location, such as a warehouse, a store, or a 
branch office, might be an important thing in a system. Finally, information about 
an incident or an interaction can be a thing—information about an order, a service 
call, a contract, or an airplane flight. A sale, a shipment, and a return are all important incidents in the RMO case. Sometimes, these incidents are thought of as associations between things. For example, a sale is an association between a customer and 
an item of inventory. Initially, the analyst might simply list all these as things and 
then make adjustments as required by different approaches to analysis and design.
The analyst identifies these types of things by thinking about each use case, 
talking to users, and asking questions. For example, for each use case, what 
types of things are affected that the system needs to know about and store information about? The types of things shown in Figure 4-1 can be used to systematically brainstorm about what types of things might be involved in each use case. 
When a customer wants to buy from the Web site, the system needs to store 
information about the customer, the items ordered, the details about the sale 
itself—such as the date and payment terms—and the location of the items to 
brainstorming technique a technique 
used to identify problem domain classes in 
which developers work with users to identify 
classes by thinking about different types of 
things they use in their work
Figure 4-1 Types of things to use for the brainstorming technique
sensor
timer
controller
assembly line
production machine
sorter
printer
inventory bin
Devices
warehouse
branch office
factory
retail store
desktop
Sites/
locations
flight
service call
logon
logoff
contract
purchase
order
payment
Incidents,
events, or
interactions
airplane
book
vehicle
document
worksheet
Tangible
things
employee
customer
doctor
patient
end user
system
administrator
Roles
played
Things
division
department
section
task force
workgroup
Organizational
units
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require
