benefi ts from the system and decide whether the change is worthwhile. However, it is not 
that simple, because most costs and benefi ts are not certain. Th ere is some uncertainty as 
to whether a certain benefi t or cost will actually occur; so both the costs of and benefi ts 
from the new system need to be weighted by the degree of certainty associated with them 
(Figure 13-5). Unfortunately, most humans tend to overestimate the probability of costs and 
underestimate the probability of benefi ts.
Th ere are also costs and, sometimes, benefi ts associated with the actual transition process itself. For example, suppose we found a nicer house or apartment than our current one. 
Even if we liked it better, we might decide not to move simply because the cost of moving 
outweighed the benefi ts from the new house or apartment itself. Likewise, adopting a new 
computer system might require us to learn new skills, which could be seen as a cost to some 
people or as a benefi t to others, if they perceived that those skills would somehow provide 
other benefi ts beyond the use of the system itself. Once again, any costs and benefi ts from 
the transition process must be weighted by the certainty with which they will occur (see 
Figure 13-5).
Taken together, these two sets of costs and benefi ts (and their relative certainties) aff ect 
the acceptance of change or resistance to change that project teams encounter when installing new systems in organizations. Th e fi rst step in change management is to understand the 
factors that inhibit change—the factors that aff ect the perception of costs and benefi ts and 
certainty that they will be generated by the new system. It is critical to understand that the 
real costs and real benefi ts are far less important than the perceived costs and perceived benefi ts. People act on what they believe to be true, not on what is true. Th us, any understanding 
of how to motivate change must be developed from the viewpoint of the people expected to 
change, not from the viewpoint of those leading the change.
Revising Management Policies
Th e fi rst major step in the change management plan is to change the management policies that 
were designed for the as-is system to new management policies designed to support the to-be 
system. Management policies provide goals, defi ne how work processes should be performed, and 
determine how organizational members are rewarded. No computer system will be successfully 
adopted unless management policies support its adoption. Many new computer systems bring 
changes to business processes; they enable new ways of working. Unless the policies that provide 
the rules and rewards for those processes are revised to refl ect the new opportunities that the 
system permits, potential adopters cannot easily use it.
FIGURE 13-5
The Costs and 
Benefi ts of Change
As-Is
System
Restraining
Factors
Enabling
Factors
Costs of
Transition
X
Certainty of
Costs
Occurring
Benefits of
Transition
X
Certainty of
Benefits
Occurring
To-Be
System Transition
Restraining
Factors
Enabling
Factors
Costs of
To-Be System
X
Certainty of
Costs
Occurring
Benefits of
To-Be System
X
Certainty of
Benefits
Occurring
492 Chapter 13 Installation and Operations
Management has three basic tools for structuring work processes in organizations.8 Th e 
fi rst are the standard operating procedures (SOPs) that become the habitual routines for how 
work is performed. Th e SOPs are both formal and informal. Formal SOPs defi ne proper 
behavior. Informal SOPs are the norms that have developed over time for how processes are 
actually performed. Management must ensure that the formal SOPs are revised to match the 
to-be system. Th e informal SOPs will then evolve to refi ne and fi ll in details absent in the 
formal SOPs.
Th e second aspect of management policy is defi ning how people assign meaning to 
events. What does it mean to “be successful” or “do good work”? Policies help people 
understand meaning by defi ning measurements and rewards. Measurements explicitly defi ne 
meaning because they provide clear and concrete evidence about what is important to the 
organization. Rewards reinforce measurements because “what gets measured gets done” (an 
overused but accurate saying). Measurements must be carefully designed to motivate desired 
behavior. 
A third aspect of management policy is resource allocation. Managers can have clear 
and immediate impacts on behavior by allocating resources. Th ey can redirect funds and 
staff from one project to another, create an infrastructure that supports the new system, and 
invest in training programs. Each of these activities has both a direct and symbolic eff ect. Th e 
direct eff ect comes from the actual reallocation of resources. Th e symbolic eff ect shows that 
management is serious about its intentions. Th ere is less uncertainty about management’s 
long-term commitment to a new system when potential adopters see resources being committed to support it.
Assessing Costs and Benefi ts
Th e next step in developing a change management plan is to develop two clear and concise 
lists of costs and benefi ts provided by the new system (and the transition to it) compared with 
the as-is system. Th e fi rst list is developed from the perspective of the organization, which 
should fl ow easily from the business case developed during the feasibility study and refi ned 
over the life of the project (see Chapter 2). Th is set of organizational costs and benefi ts should 
be distributed widely so that everyone expected to adopt the new system should clearly understand why the new system is valuable to the organization.
Th e second list of costs and benefi ts is developed from the viewpoints of the diff erent 
potential adopters expected to change, or stakeholders in the change. For example, one set of 
potential adopters may be the frontline employees, another may be the fi rst-line supervisors, 
and yet another might be middle management. Each of these potential adopters, or stakeholders, may have a diff erent set of costs and benefi ts associated with the change—costs and 
benefi ts that can diff er widely from those of the organization. In some situations, unions may 
be key stakeholders that can make or break successful change.
Many systems analysts naturally assume that frontline employees are the ones whose set 
of costs and benefi ts are the most likely to diverge from those of the organization and thus are 
the ones who most resist change. However, they usually bear the brunt of problems with the 
current system. When problems occur, they oft en experience them fi rsthand. Middle managers and fi rst-line supervisors are the most likely to have a divergent set of costs and benefi ts 
and, therefore, resist change because new computer systems oft en change how much power 
they have. For example, a new computer system may improve the organization’s control over 
8 Th is section builds on the work of Anthony Giddons, Th e Constitution of Society: Outline of the Th eory of Structure
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984). A good summary of Giddons’s theory that has been revised and 
adapted for use in understanding information systems is an article by Wanda Orlikowski and Dan Robey, “Information Technology and the Structuring of Organizations,” Information Systems Research 2, no. 2 (1991): 143–169.
Change Management  493
a work process (a benefi t to the organization) but reduce the decision-making power of middle 
management (a clear cost to middle managers).
An analysis of the costs and benefi ts for each set of potential adopters, or stakeholders, 
will help pinpoint those who will likely support the change and those who might resist the 
change. Th e challenge at this point is to try to change the balance of the costs and benefi ts 
for those expected to resist the change so that they support it (or at least do not actively resist 
it). Th is analysis could uncover some serious problems that have the potential to block the 
successful adoption of the system. It may be necessary to reexamine the management policies 
and make signifi cant changes to ensure that the balance of costs and benefi ts is such that 
important potential adopters are motivated to adopt the system.
Figure 13-6 summarizes some of the factors that are important to successful change. 
Th e fi rst and most important reason is a compelling personal reason to change. All change is 
made by individuals, not organizations. If there are compelling reasons for the key groups of 
individual stakeholders to want the change, then the change is more likely to be successful. 
Factors such as increased salary, reduced unpleasantness, and—depending on the individuals—opportunities for promotion and personal development can be important motivators. 
However, if the change makes current skills less valuable, individuals might resist the change 
because they have invested a lot of time and energy in acquiring those skills, and anything that 
diminishes those skills may be perceived as diminishing the individual (because important 
skills bring respect and power).
Th ere must also be a compelling reason for the organization to need the change; otherwise, individuals become skeptical that the change is important and are less certain it will, 
in fact, occur. Probably the hardest organization to change is an organization that has been 
successful because individuals come to believe that what worked in the past will continue to 
work. By contrast, in an organization that is on the brink of bankruptcy, it is easier to convince 
individuals that change is needed. Commitment and support from credible business sponsors 
and top management are also important in increasing the certainty that the change will occur.
Th e likelihood of successful change is increased when the cost of the transition to individuals who must change is low. Th e need for signifi cantly diff erent new skills or disruptions 
in operations and work habits can create resistance. A clear migration plan developed by a 
credible change agent who has support from the business sponsor is an important factor in 
increasing the certainty about the costs of the transition process.
Motivating Adoption
Th e single most important factor in motivating a change is providing clear and convincing 
evidence of the need for change. Simply put, everyone who is expected to adopt the change 
must be convinced that the benefi ts from the to-be system outweigh the costs of changing.
Th ere are two basic strategies to motivating adoption: informational and political. 
Both strategies are oft en used simultaneously. With an informational strategy, the goal is to 
convince potential adopters that the change is for the better. Th is strategy works when the 
cost–benefi t set of the target adopters has more benefi ts than costs. In other words, there 
really are clear reasons for the potential adopters to welcome the change.
Using this approach, the project team provides clear and convincing evidence of the costs 
and benefi ts of moving to the to-be system. Th e project team writes memos and develops presentations that outline the costs and benefi ts of adopting the system from the perspective of the 
organization and from the perspective of the target group of potential adopters. Th is information 
is disseminated widely throughout the target group, much like an advertising or public relations 
campaign. It must emphasize the benefi ts and increase the certainty in the minds of potential 
adopters that these benefi ts will actually be achieved. In our experience, it is always easier to sell 
painkillers than vitamins; that is, it is easier to convince potential adopters that a new system will 
494 Chapter 13 Installation and Operations
 Factor Examples Effects Actions to Take
Benefi ts of to-be 
system
Compelling 
personal 
reason(s) for 
change
Increased pay, fewer 
unpleasant aspects, 
opportunity for promotion, most existing 
skills remain valuable
If the new system provides clear 
personal benefi ts to those who 
must adopt it, they are more 
likely to embrace the change.
Perform a cost–benefi t analysis 
from the viewpoint of the 
stakeholders, make changes 
where needed, and actively 
promote the benefi ts.
Certainty of 
benefi ts
Compelling 
organizational 
reason(s) for 
change
Risk of bankruptcy, 
acquisition, 
government 
regulation
If adopters do not understand 
why the organization is 
implementing the change, 
they are less certain that the 
change will occur.
Perform a cost–benefi t analysis 
from the viewpoint of the 
organization and launch 
a vigorous information 
campaign to explain the 
results to everyone.
Demonstrated top 
management 
support
Active involvement, 
frequent mentions in 
speeches
If top management is not seen 
to actively support the change, 
there is less certainly that the 
change will occur.
Encourage top management 
to participate in the 
information campaign.
Committed and 
involved business 
sponsor
Active involvement, 
frequent visits to users 
and project team, 
championing
If the business sponsor (the 
functional manager who 
initiated the project) is not 
seen to actively support the 
change, there is less certainty 
that the change will occur.
Encourage the business 
sponsor to participate in the 
information campaign and 
play an active role in the 
change management plan.
Credible top 
management and 
business sponsor
Management and 
sponsor who do what 
they say instead of 
being members of the 
“management fad of 
the month” club
If the business sponsor and top 
management have credibility 
in the eyes of the adopters, 
the certainty of the claimed 
benefi ts is higher.
Ensure that the business 
sponsor and/or top 
management has credibility 
so that such involvement 
will help; if there is no 
credibility, involvement will 
have little effect.
Costs of 
transition
Low personal costs 
of change
Few new skills needed The cost of the change is 
not borne equally by all 
stakeholders; the costs are 
likely to be higher for some.
Perform a cost–benefi t analysis 
from the viewpoint of the 
stakeholders, make changes 
where needed, and actively 
promote the low costs.
Certainty of costs Clear plan for 
change
Clear dates and 
instructions for change, 
clear expectations
If there is a clear migration 
plan, it will likely lower the 
perceived costs of transition.
Publicize the migration plan.
Credible change 
agent
Previous experience 
with change, does 
what he/she promises 
to do
If the change agent has 
credibility in the eyes of the 
adopters, the certainty of the 
claimed costs is higher.
If the change agent is not 
credible, then change will 
be diffi cult.
Clear mandate for 
change agent 
from sponsor
Open support for 
change agent when 
disagreements occur
If the change agent has a clear 
mandate from the business 
sponsor, the certainty of the 
claimed costs is higher.
The business sponsor must 
actively demonstrate 
support for the change 
agent.
FIGURE 13-6  Major Factors in Successful Change
remove a major problem (or other source of pain) than that it will provide new benefi ts (e.g., 
increase sales). Th erefore, informational campaigns are more likely to be successful if they stress 
reducing or eliminating problems rather than focusing on providing new opportunities.
Th e other strategy for motivating change is a political strategy. With a political strategy, 
organizational power, not information, is used to motivate change. Th is approach is oft en 
Change Management  495
used when the cost–benefi t set of the target adopters has more costs than benefi ts. In other 
words, although the change might benefi t the organization, there are no reasons for the 
potential adopters to welcome the change.
Th e political strategy is usually beyond the control of the project team. It requires someone in the organization who holds legitimate power over the target group to infl uence the 
group to adopt the change. Th is may be done in a coercive manner (e.g., adopt the system 
or you’re fi red) or in a negotiated manner, in which the target group gains benefi ts in other 
ways that are linked to the adoption of the system (e.g., linking system adoption to increased 
training opportunities). Management policies can play a key role in a political strategy by 
linking salary to certain behaviors desired with the new system.
In general, for any change that has true organizational benefi ts, about 20 to 30 percent of 
potential adopters will be ready adopters. Th ey recognize the benefi ts, quickly adopt the system, and become proponents of the system. Another 20 to 30 percent are resistant adopters. 
Th ey simply refuse to accept the change and they fi ght it, either because the new system has 
more costs than benefi ts for them personally or because they place such a high cost on the 
transition process itself that no amount of benefi ts from the new system can outweigh the 
change costs. Th e remaining 40 to 60 percent are reluctant adopters. Th ey tend to be apathetic 
and will go with the fl ow to either support or resist the system, depending on how the project 
evolves and how their coworkers react to the system. Figure 13-7 illustrates the actors who are 
involved in the change management process.
Th e goal of change management is to actively support and encourage the ready adopters 
and help them win over the reluctant adopters. Th ere is usually little that can be done about 
the resistant adopters because their set of costs and benefi ts may be divergent from those of 
the organization. Unless there are simple steps that can be taken to rebalance their costs and 
benefi ts or the organization chooses to adopt a strongly political strategy, it is oft en best to 
ignore this small minority of resistant adopters and focus on the larger majority of ready and 
reluctant adopters.
Enabling Adoption: Training
Potential adopters might want to adopt the change, but unless they are capable of adopting 
it, they won’t. Careful training enables adoption by providing the skills needed to adopt 
the change. Training is probably the most self-evident part of any change management 
initiative. How can an organization expect its staff members to adopt a new system if they are 
not trained? However, we have found that training is one of the most commonly overlooked 
parts of the process. Many organizations and project managers simply expect potential adopters to fi nd the system easy to learn. Because the system is presumed to be so simple, it is taken 
for granted that potential adopters should be able to learn with little eff ort. Unfortunately, this 
is usually an overly optimistic assumption.
Every new system requires new skills, either because the basic work processes have changed 
or because the computer system used to support the processes is diff erent. Th e more radical the 
changes to the business processes, the more important it is to ensure the organization has the new 
The sponsor wants The change agent leads Potential adopters are the people
 the change to occur. the change effort. who must change. 
20–30 percent are ready adopters.
 20–30 percent are resistant adopters.
40–60 percent are reluctant adopters.
Sponsor Change Agent Potential Adopters
FIGURE 13-7
Actors in the 
Change 
Management 
Process
496 Chapter 13 Installation and Operations
skills required to operate the new business processes and supporting information systems. In 
general, there are three ways to get these new skills. One is to hire new employees who have the 
needed skills that the existing staff does not. Another is to outsource the processes to an organization that has the skills that the existing staff does not. Both these approaches are controversial 
and are usually considered only when the new skills needed are likely to be the most diff erent 
from the set of skills of the current staff . In most cases, organizations choose the third alternative: 
training existing staff in the new business processes and the to-be system. Every training plan 
must consider what to train and how to deliver the training.
What to Train What training should you provide to the system users? It’s obvious: how to 
use the system. Th e training should cover all the capabilities of the new system so that users 
understand what each module does, right? Wrong. Training for business systems should 
focus on helping the users to accomplish their jobs, not on how to use the system. Th e system 
is simply a means to an end, not the end in itself. Th is focus on performing the job (i.e., the 
business processes), not using the system, has two important implications. First, the training 
must focus on the activities around the system as well as on the system itself. Th e training 
must help the users understand how the computer fi ts into the bigger picture of their jobs. 
Th e use of the system must be put in context of the manual business processes as well as of 
those that are computerized, and it must also cover the new management policies that were 
implemented along with the new computer system.
Second, the training should focus on what the user needs to do, not what the system 
can do. Th is is a subtle—but very important—distinction. Most systems provide far more 
capabilities than the users will need to use (e.g., when was the last time you wrote a macro in 
Microsoft Word?). Rather than attempting to teach the users all the features of the system, 
training should instead focus on the much smaller set of activities that users perform on a 
regular basis and ensure that users are truly expert in those. When the focus is on the 20 percent of functions that the users will use 80 percent of the time (instead of attempting to cover 
all functions), users become confi dent about their ability to use the system. Training should 
mention the other little-used functions but only so that users are aware of their existence and 
know how to learn about them when their use becomes necessary.
One source of guidance for designing training materials is the use cases. Th e use cases 
outline the common activities that users perform and thus can be helpful in understanding 
the business processes and system functions that are likely to be most important to the users.
How to Train Th ere are many ways to deliver training. Th e most commonly used approach 
is classroom training, in which many users are trained at the same time by the same instructor. 
Th is has the advantage of training many users at one time with only one instructor and creates 
a shared experience among the users.
It is also possible to provide one-on-one training, in which one trainer works closely with 
one user at a time. Th is is obviously more expensive, but the trainer can design the training 
program to meet the needs of individual users and can better ensure that the users really do 
understand the material. Th is approach is typically used only when the users are very important or when there are very few users.
Another approach that is becoming more common is to use some form of computer-based 
training (CBT), in which the training program is delivered via computer, either on CD or over 
the Web. CBT programs can include text slides, audio, and even video and animation. CBT 
is typically more costly to develop but is cheaper to deliver because no instructor is needed to 
actually provide the training.
Figure 13-8 summarizes four important factors to consider in selecting a training 
method: cost to develop, cost to deliver, impact, and reach. CBT is typically more expensive 
Post-Implementation Activities  497
Cost to develop Low to Medium Medium High
Cost to deliver High Medium Low
Impact High Medium to High Low to Medium
Reach Low Medium High
One-on-One Classroom Computer-Based 
 Training Training Training
FIGURE 13-8
Selecting a 
Training Method
to develop than one-on-one or classroom training, but it is less expensive to deliver. Oneon-one training has the most impact on the user because it can be customized to the user’s 
precise needs, knowledge, and abilities, whereas CBT has the least impact. However, CBT has 
the greatest reach—the ability to train the most users over the widest distance in the shortest 
time—because it is much simpler to distribute than classroom and one-on-one training, simply because no instructors are needed.
Figure 13-8 suggests a clear pattern for most organizations. If there are only a few users to 
train, one-on-one training is the most eff ective. If there are many users to train, many organizations turn to CBT. We believe that the use of CBT will increase in the future. Quite oft en, 
large organizations use a combination of all three methods. Regardless of which approach 
is used, it is important to leave the users with a set of easily accessible materials that can be 
referred to long aft er the training has ended (usually a quick reference guide and a set of 
manuals, whether on paper or in electronic form).
POST-IMPLEMENTATION ACTIVITIES9
Th e goal of post-implementation activities is the institutionalization of the use of the new 
system—i.e., to make it the normal, accepted, routine way of performing the business processes. 
Post-implementation activities attempt to refreeze the organization aft er the successful transition to the new system. Although the work of the project team naturally winds down aft er 
implementation, the business sponsor and sometimes the project manager are actively involved 
in refreezing. Th ese two—and, ideally, many other stakeholders—actively promote the new 
system and monitor its adoption and usage. Th ey usually provide a steady fl ow of information 
about the system and encourage users to contact them to discuss issues.
In this section, we examine three key post-implementation activities: system support 
(providing assistance in the use of the system), system maintenance (continuing to refi ne 
and improve the system), and project assessment (analyzing the project to understand what 
activities were done well—and should be repeated—and what activities need improvement in 
future projects).
System Support
Once the project team has installed the system and performed the change management activities, the system is offi cially turned over to the operations group. Th is group is responsible for 
operating the system, whereas the project team was responsible for developing the system. 
Members of the operations group are usually closely involved in the installation activities 
because they are the ones who must ensure that the system actually works. Aft er the system 
is installed, the project team leaves but the operations group remains.
9 Th e material in this section is related to the Enhanced Unifi ed Process’s Production Phase and the Operations and 
Support workfl ow (see Figure 1-18).
498 Chapter 13 Installation and Operations
Providing system support means helping the users to use the system. Usually, this means 
providing answers to questions and helping users understand how to perform a certain function; this type of support can be thought of as on-demand training.
Online support is the most common form of on-demand training. Th is includes the documentation and help screens built into the system, as well as separate websites that provide 
answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs), which enable users to fi nd answers without 
contacting a person. Obviously, the goal of most system support is to provide suffi ciently good 
online support so that the user doesn’t need to contact a person, because providing online support is much less expensive than is providing a person to answer questions.
Most organizations provide a help desk that provides a place for a user to talk with a 
person who can answer questions (usually over the phone but sometimes in person). Th e 
help desk supports all systems, not just one specifi c system, so it receives calls about a wide 
variety of soft ware and hardware. Th e help desk is operated by level-1 support staff who have 
very broad computer skills and are able to respond to a wide range of requests, from network 
problems and hardware problems to problems with commercial soft ware and problems with 
the business application soft ware developed in-house.
Th e goal of most help desks is to have the level-1 support staff resolve 80 percent of the 
help requests they receive on the fi rst call. If the issue cannot be resolved by level 1 support 
staff , a problem report (Figure 13-9) is completed (oft en using a special computer system 
designed to track problem reports) and passed to a level-2 support staff member.
Th e level-2 support staff members are people who know the application system well and can 
provide expert advice. For a new system, they are usually selected during the implementation 
phase and become familiar with the system as it is being tested. Sometimes the level-2 support 
staff members participate in training during the change management process to become more 
knowledgeable about the system, the new business processes, and the users themselves.
Th e level-2 support staff works with users to resolve problems. Most problems are successfully resolved by the level-2 staff . However, sometimes, particularly in the fi rst few months 
aft er the system is installed, the problem turns out to be a bug in the soft ware that must be 
fi xed. In this case, the problem report becomes a change request that is passed to the system 
maintenance group (see the next section).
System Maintenance
System maintenance is the process of refi ning the system to make sure it continues to meet 
business needs. More money and eff ort are devoted to system maintenance than to the initial 
development of the system, simply because a system continues to change and evolve as it is used. 
Most beginning systems analysts and programmers work fi rst on maintenance projects; usually 
only aft er they have gained some experience are they assigned to new development projects.
• Time and date of the report
• Name, e-mail address, and telephone number of the 
support person taking the report
• Name, e-mail address, and telephone number of the 
person who reported the problem
• Software and/or hardware causing problem
• Location of the problem
• Description of the problem
• Action taken
• Disposition (problem fi xed or forwarded to system 
maintenance)
FIGURE 13-9
Elements of a 
Problem Report
Post-Implementation Activities  499
Every system is “owned” by a project manager in the IS group (Figure 13-10). Th is individual is responsible for coordinating the system’s maintenance eff ort for that system. Whenever 
a potential change to the system is identifi ed, a change request is prepared and forwarded to 
the project manager. Th e change request is a smaller version of the system request discussed in 
Chapter 2. It describes the change requested and explains why the change is important.
Changes can be small or large. Change requests that are likely to require a signifi cant 
eff ort are typically handled in the same manner as system requests: Th ey follow the same 
process as the project described in this book, starting with project identifi cation in Chapter 2 
and following through installation in this chapter. Minor changes typically follow a smaller 
version of this same process. Th ere is an initial assessment of feasibility and of costs and benefi ts, and the change request is prioritized. Th en a systems analyst (or a programmer/analyst) 
performs the analysis, which might include interviewing users, and prepares an initial design 
before programming begins. Th e new (or revised) program is then extensively tested before 
the system is converted from the old system to the revised one.
2. Change Request
with Feasibility,
Costs, and Benefits
3. Priority
4. Change Request
5. Design
6. Changed
System
1. Potential
Change
Analyst
Users
Change Committee
Programmer
Project
Manager
Problem Reports
Results: Passed Open items:
Test ID: Requirement addressed:
Objective:
Test cases
Interface ID
Script
Expected results notes
Actual results notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Data Field Value Entered
Problem Reports
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code blank
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code 9021
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code 90210
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code C1A58
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code CAA 2C6
ORD56-3.5
Test 3 and 6 are valid U.S. and Canadian codes that match tested city. All others should be rejected.
Test 3 and 6 accepted. Tests 1, 2, 4, and 5 were rejected with correct message.
ZIP code/postal code C1A 2C6
12 Verify ordering information
Ensure that the information entered by the customer on the place-order form is valid
Changes to Other Systems
Results: Passed Open items:
Test ID: Requirement addressed:
Objective:
Test cases
Interface ID
Script
Expected results notes
Actual results notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Data Field Value Entered
Change Request
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code blank
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code 9021
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code 90210
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code C1A58
ORD56-3.5 ZIP code/postal code CAA 2C6
ORD56-3.5
Test 3 and 6 are valid U.S. and Canadian codes that match tested city. All others should be rejected.
Test 3 and 6 accepted. Tests 1, 2, 4, and 5 were rejected with z message.
ZIP code/postal code C1A 2C6
12 Verify ordering information
Ensure that the information entered by the customer on the place-order form is valid
Software or Network Changes
FIGURE 13-10  Processing a Change Request
500 Chapter 13 Installation and Operations
Change requests typically come from fi ve sources. Th e most common source is problem 
reports from the operations group that identify bugs in the system that must be fi xed. Th ese 
are usually given immediate priority because a bug can cause signifi cant problems. Even a 
minor bug can cause major problems by upsetting users and reducing their acceptance of and 
confi dence in the system.
Th e second most common source of change requests is enhancement to the system from 
users. As users work with the system, they oft en identify minor changes in the design that can 
make the system easier to use or identify additional functions that are needed. Such enhancements 
are important in satisfying the users and are oft en key in ensuring that the system changes as the 
business requirements change. Enhancements are oft en given second priority aft er bug fi xes.
Th e third source of change requests is other system development projects. For example, 
if the doctor in the appointment problem decided that he or she would like to have a Webbased appointment system that would allow patients to directly interact with the current 
appointment system, it is likely that other systems, such as billing, would have to be modifi ed 
to ensure that the two systems would work together. Th ese changes required by the need to 
integrate two systems are generally rare but are becoming more common as system integration eff orts become more common.
Th e fourth source of change requests is those that occur when underlying soft ware or networks change. For example, new versions of Windows oft en require an application to change 
the way the system interacts with Windows or enables application systems to take advantage of 
new features that improve effi ciency. Although users might never see these changes (because 
most changes are inside the system and do not aff ect its user interface or functionality), these 
changes can be among the most challenging to implement because analysts and programmers 
must learn about the new system characteristics, understand how application systems use (or 
can use) those characteristics, and then make the needed programming changes.
Th e fi fth source of change requests is senior management. Th ese change requests are 
oft en driven by major changes in the organization’s strategy or operations. Th ese signifi cant 
change requests are typically treated as separate projects, but the project manager responsible 
for the initial system is oft en placed in charge of the new project.
Project Assessment
Th e goal of project assessment is to understand what was successful about the system and the adsa jas wygdsak abd butch ass phat 20 inch hair ur came in a pact go bad bitch go bad bitch go go bad bitch go bad bitch go
