Figure 2-16 illustrates another workflow diagram, which demonstrates 
some new concepts. In this example, a customer is ordering a product that has 
to be manufactured to match customer specifications. To show that the salesper son sends the order to Engineering, the diagram uses a new symbol to emphasize 
the transmission of the document between Sales and Engineering. After Engi neering develops the specifications, two concurrent activities happen: Purchas ing orders the materials, and Production writes the program for the automated 
milling machines. These two activities are completely independent and can 
occur at the same time. Notice that one synchronization bar splits the path into 
two concurrent paths and that another synchronization bar reconnects them. 
Finally, Scheduling puts the order on the Production schedule.
Creating activity diagrams to document workflows is straightforward. 
The first step is to identify the agents to create the appropriate swimlanes. Next, 
follow the various steps of the workflow and then make appropriate ovals for 
the activities. Connect the activity ovals with arrows to show the workflow. 
Here are a couple guidelines:
■ Use a decision symbol to represent an either/or situation—one path or the 
other path but not both. As a shorthand notation, you can merge an activ ity (by using an oval) and a decision (by using a diamond) into a single oval 
Salesperson Engineering Purchasing Production
Accept
order
Make
specifications
Buy
materials
Program
computer
Schedule
production
Scheduling
Order
Figur e 2-16 Activity diagram showing concurrent paths
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 2 ■ Investigating System Requirements 63
with two exit arrows, as indicated on the right in Figure 2-14. This nota tion represents a decision (either/or) activity. Wherever you have an activity 
that reads “verify” or “check,” you will probably require a decision—one 
for the “accept” path and one for the “reject” path.
■ Use synchronization bars for parallel paths—situations in which both paths 
are taken. Include a beginning and an ending synchronization bar. You can 
also use synchronization bars to represent a loop, such as a “do while” pro gramming loop. Put the bar at the beginning of the loop and then describe 
it as “for every.” Put another synchronization bar at the end of the loop 
with the description “end for every.”
CHAPTER Summary
This chapter focuses on system requirements, which is 
the focus of the Core Process 3 (systems analysis) of 
the SDLC. There are five primary activities of systems 
analysis:
■ Gather detailed information.
■ Define requirements.
■ Prioritize requirements.
■ Develop user-interface dialogs.
■ Evaluate requirements with users.
Functional requirements are those that explain the 
basic business functions that the new system must sup port. Nonfunctional requirements involve the system’s 
objectives with regard to usability, reliability, perfor mance, and security.
Stakeholders include internal and external users 
of the system and other persons or organizations that 
have a vested interest in the system.
Analysts use many techniques to gather informa tion about requirements, including:
■ Interviews
■ Questionnaires
■ Documentation, input and output reviews
■ Process observation and documentation
■ Vendor solution research
■ Active comments and suggestions from users
Textual, graphical, and mathematical models are 
developed to document requirements and as an aid in 
evaluating requirements with users and other stake holders. Models are created when gathering informa tion about the system. They are also created when 
designing the system. Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) defines a collection of diagrams and constructs 
used for system modeling.
UML activity diagrams are used to model work flows, a technique often used as an early requirements 
model. Activity diagrams graphically model the steps 
of a business process and the participants who per form them. Other models and UML diagrams are cov ered in later chapters.
internal stakeholders
mathematical models
model
nonfunctional requirements
open-ended questions
operational stakeholders
performance requirements
reliability requirements
security requirements
stakeholders
swimlane
synchronization bar
system requirements
technology architecture
textual models
Unified Modeling Language 
(UML)
usability requirements
workflow
activity diagram
application architecture
client
closed-ended questions
executive stakeholders
external stakeholders
functional requirements
FURPS
FURPS+
graphical models
Key Terms
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
64 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
7. Describe the open-items list and then explain 
why it is important.
8. List and briefly describe the six information gathering techniques.
9. What is the purpose of an activity diagram?
10. Draw and explain the symbols used on an 
activity diagram.
11. Explain why the Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) is important to use as a standard for 
creating information systems models.
1. List and briefly describe the five activities of 
systems analysis.
2. What are three types of models?
3. What is the difference between functional re quirements and nonfunctional requirements?
4. Describe the steps in preparing for, conducting, 
and following up on an interview session.
5. What are the benefits of doing vendor research 
during information-gathering activities?
6. What types of stakeholders should you include in 
fact finding?
Review Questions
PROBLEMS AND EXERCISES
1. Provide an example of each of the three types 
of models that might apply to designing a car, a 
house, and an office building.
2. One of the toughest problems in investigating 
system requirements is to make sure they are 
complete and comprehensive. How would you 
ensure that you get all the right information dur ing an interview session?
3. One of the problems you will encounter during 
your investigation is scope creep (i.e., user requests 
for additional features and functions). Scope creep 
happens because users can have problems with the 
current system and the system investigation may be 
the first time anybody has listened to their needs. 
How do you keep the system from including new 
functions that expand the scope beyond the con straints imposed by the project schedule or budget?
4. What would you do if you got conflicting an swers for the same procedure from two different 
people you interviewed? What would you do if 
one was a clerical person and the other was the 
department manager?
5. You have been assigned to resolve several issues 
on the open-items list, and you are having a hard 
time getting policy decisions from the user con tact. How can you encourage the user to finalize 
these policies?
6. In the running case of RMO, assume that you 
have set up an interview with the manager of the 
Shipping Department. Your objective is to deter mine how shipping works and what the informa tion requirements for the new system will be. 
Make a list of questions—open ended and closed 
ended—that you would use. Include any ques tions or techniques you would use to ensure you 
find out about the exceptions.
7. Develop an activity diagram based on the follow ing narrative. Note any ambiguities or questions 
that you have as you develop the model. If you 
need to make assumptions, also note them.
The Purchasing Department handles pur chase requests from other departments in the 
company. People in the company who initiate 
the original purchase request are the “custom ers” of the Purchasing Department. A case 
worker within the Purchasing Department re ceives the request and monitors it until it is or dered and received.
Case workers process requests for the pur chase of products under $1,500, write a pur chase order, and then send it to the approved 
vendor. Purchase requests over $1,500 must first 
be sent out for bid from the vendor that sup plies the product. When the bids return, the case 
worker selects one bid and then writes a pur chase order and sends it to the vendor.
8. Develop an activity diagram based on the follow ing narrative. Note any ambiguities or questions 
that you have as you develop the model. If you 
need to make assumptions, also note them.
The Shipping Department receives all ship ments on outstanding purchase orders. When 
the clerk in the Shipping Department receives 
a shipment, he or she finds the outstanding 
purchase order for those items. The clerk then 
sends multiple copies of the shipment pack ing slip. One copy goes to Purchasing, and the 
department updates its records to indicate that 
the purchase order has been fulfilled. Another 
copy goes to Accounting so a payment can be 
made. A third copy goes to the requesting in house customer so he or she can receive the 
shipment arrows represent the sequence of the activities. The black circles denote the 
beginning and the ending of the workflow. The diamond is a decision point at 
which the flow of the process will either follow one path or another. The heavy 
solid line is a synchronization bar, which either splits the path into multiple 
concurrent paths or recombines concurrent paths. The swimlane represents an 
agent who performs the activities. It is called a swimlane because each agent fol lows a path parallel with other agents in the workflow, as with swimmers in a 
swimming pool.
Figure 2-15 is an activity diagram that describes the order fulfillment pro cess for the current RMO CSMS. Processing begins when the customer has 
completed the order checkout process and the warehouse begins order fulfill ment. The diagram describes the back-and-forth flow of information and con trol between the order subsystem, inventory subsystem, warehouse(s), and 
shipper. The diagram is simplified because it omits many error-handling path ways, including what happens if enough item stock is on hand to fulfill only part 
of an order.
workflow a sequence of work steps that 
completely handle one business transaction 
or customer request
activity diagram a UML diagram that 
describes user (or system) activities, the per son or component that completes each activ ity, and the sequential flow of these activities
synchronization bar an activity diagram 
component that either splits a control path 
into multiple concurrent paths or recombines 
concurrent paths
swimlane an activity diagram component 
that divides the workflow activities into 
groups showing which agent performs which 
activity
Ending activity
(Pseudo)
Activity
Transition arrow
Starting activity
(Pseudo)
Decision
activity
Another way
to show decision
Synchronization
bar (Split)
Synchronization
bar (Join)
Manager
Review
financials
Prepare
report
[no] [yes]
Swimlane
heading
Figur e 2-14 Activity diagram 
symbols
© Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 2 ■ Investigating System Requirements 61
Order subsystem
Pick Item from
stock
Prepare shipment Generate tracking
record
Store shipment
record
Transmit shipment Receive shipment
Decrement item
stock count
Transmit
shipping details
Update order
shipment status
Inventory
subsystem Warehouse Shipping
company
Find warehouse
with sufficient stock
Identify order
Select order
to process
Stock
found?
For each item
on order
End for each item
Figur e 2-15 Simple activity diagram for order fulfillment after online checkout
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
62 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities After payment is made, the Accounting 
Department sends a notification to Purchasing. After the customer receives and accepts the 
goods, he or she sends notification to Purchasing. When Purchasing receives these other verifications, it closes the purchase order as fulfilled 
and paid.
9. Conduct a fact-finding interview with someone 
involved in a procedure that is used in a business 
or organization. This person could be someone at 
the university, in a small business in your neighborhood, in the student volunteer office at the 
university, in a doctor’s or dentist’s office, or in a 
volunteer organization. Identify a process, such 
as keeping student records, customer records, or 
member records. Make a list of questions and then 
conduct the interview. Remember, your objective 
is to understand that procedure thoroughly (i.e., to 
become an expert on that single procedure).
10. Using RMO and the CSMS as your guide, develop a list of all the procedures that may need 
to be researched. You may want to think about 
the exercise in the context of your experience 
with such retailers as L.L. Bean, Lands’ End, or 
Amazon.com. Check out the Internet marketing 
done on the retailers’ Web sites and then think 
about the underlying business procedures that 
are required to support those sales activities. List 
the procedures and then describe your understanding of each.
John and Jacob, Inc.: Online 
Trading System
John and Jacob, Inc., is a regional brokerage firm that has 
been successful over the last several years. Competition for 
customers is intense in this industry. The large national firms 
have very deep pockets, with many services to offer clients. 
Severe competition also comes from discount and Internet 
trading companies. However, John and Jacob has been able 
to cultivate a substantial customer base from upper-middleincome clients in the northeastern United States. To maintain a competitive edge with its customers, John and Jacob 
is in the process of modernizing its online trading system. 
The modernization will add new features to the existing system and expand the range of interfaces beyond desktop and 
laptop computers to include tablet computers and smartphones. The system will add Twitter messaging in addition 
to continued support for traditional e-mail.
Edward Finnigan, the project manager, is in the process of identifying all the groups of people who should be 
included in the development of the system requirements. 
He is not quite sure exactly who should be included. Here 
are the issues he is considering:
■ Users. The trading system will be used by customers and by staff in each of the company’s 30 trading 
offices. Obviously, the brokers who are going to use 
the system need to have input, but how should this be 
done? Edward also is not sure what approach would 
be best to ensure that the requirements are complete 
without requiring tremendous amounts of time from the 
stakeholders. Including all the offices would increase 
enthusiasm and support for the system, but it would 
increase the time required to compile the information. 
Furthermore, involving more brokers would bring divergent opinions that would have to be reconciled.
■ Customers. The trading system will also include trade 
order entry, investment analysis reports, trade confirmations, standard and customized reporting, and customer statements. Edward wonders how to involve 
John and Jacob customers in the development of system requirements. Edward is sensitive to this issue 
because many brokers have told him that their customers are unhappy with the current system, and customer complaints are sometimes posted to the public 
comments area of the current Web site. He would like 
to involve customers, but he does not know how.
■ Other stakeholders. Edward knows he should involve 
other stakeholders to help define system requirements. 
He is not quite sure whom he should contact. Should he 
go to senior executives? Should he contact middle management? Should he include such back-office functions 
as accounting and investing? He is not quite sure how to 
get organized or how to decide who should be involved.
1. What is the best method for Edward to involve the 
brokers (users) in the development of the updated 
online trading system? Should he use a questionnaire? 
Should he interview the brokers in each of the company’s 30 offices or would one or two brokers representing the entire group be better? How can ­Edward 
ensure that the information about requirements is 
complete, yet not lose too much time doing so?
2. Concerning customer input for the new system, how can 
Edward involve customers in the process? How can he 
interest them in participating? What methods can Edward 
use to ensure that the customers he involves are representative of John and Jacob’s entire customer group?
3. As Edward considers what other stakeholders he 
should include, what are some criteria he should use? 
Develop some guidelines to help him build a list of 
people to include.
CASE STUDY
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
66 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
Community Board of Realtors®
The real estate business relies on an extensive amount of 
information used in the buying and selling of real property. Most communities of real estate agents and brokers 
have formed cooperative organizations to help consolidate and distribute information on the real estate profession, real estate trends, properties in the community, 
historical records of property sales, and current listings 
of properties for sale. These organizations are usually 
referred to as the Community Board of Realtors.
Research your local Community Board of Realtors to answer these questions:
1. Who are the stakeholders for the issues related to 
real estate in your community, and what are their 
main interests?
2. What types of information does the board collect and make available to its members and to the 
community?
3. Research the real estate industry in at least two 
countries other than the United States. For each of 
these countries, what are some of the cultural and 
legal issues that differ from those in the United 
States? If you were working on support for an international real estate cooperative system, in what 
ways would the information collection activity 
process be complicated?
Running Case Studies
The Spring Breaks ‘R’ Us Travel Service
Spring Breaks ‘R’ Us (SBRU) is an online travel service that books spring break trips to resorts for college 
students. Students have booked spring break trips for 
decades, but changes in technology have transformed 
the travel business in recent years. SBRU moved away 
from having campus reps with posted fliers and moved 
to the Web early on. The basic idea is to get a group 
of students to book a room at a resort for one of the 
traditional spring break weeks. SBRU contracts with 
dozens of resorts in key spring break destinations like 
Florida, Texas, the Caribbean, and Mexico. Its Web 
site shows information on each resort and includes 
prices, available rooms, and special features. Students 
can research and book a room, enter contract information, and pay deposits and final payments through 
the system. SBRU provides updated booking information, resort information updates, and travel information for booked students when they log in to the site.
The resorts also need access to information from 
SBRU. They need to know about their bookings for 
each week, the room types that are booked, and so 
forth. Before the spring break booking season starts, 
they need to enter information on their resorts, including prices and special features. Resorts need to be paid 
by SBRU for the bookings, and they need to be able to 
report and collect for damages caused by spring breakers during their stay.
SBRU has recently decided to upgrade its system 
to provide social networking features for students. It 
is currently researching possibilities and collecting information from prospective customers about desirable 
features and functions. From the business standpoint, 
the idea is to increase bookings by enhancing the 
experience before, during, and after the trip.
1. Who are the stakeholders for SBRU? For each 
type of stakeholder, what aspects of the SBRU 
booking system are of particular interest?
2. What are the main functional requirements 
for the major subsystems (i.e., resort relations, 
student booking, accounting and finance, and 
social networking)?
3. Describe some usability requirements for students, booking interactions, and social networking interactions.
4. Assuming that social networking at the resorts 
will require wireless communication and connection to the Internet, what are some reliability 
requirements that resorts might be asked to 
maintain? What are some performance requirements? Is this a bigger issue because resorts are 
in international locations?
5. What are some security requirements? Is there 
any reason why students in Europe, Asia, or 
other locations could not book rooms through 
SBRU? What issues might be anticipated?
6. To collect information on functional requirements for the social networking subsystem, what 
are some techniques that might be used? Be 
specific and include some sample questions you 
might ask by using various techniques.
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
CHAPTER 2 ■ Investigating System Requirements 67
On the Spot Courier Services
As an employee of a large international courier and 
shipping service, Bill Wiley met with many companies 
that shipped and received packages almost every day. 
He was frequently asked if his company could deliver 
local packages on the same day. Over several months, 
he observed that there appeared to be a substantial 
need for courier services in the city in which he lived. 
He decided that he would form his own courier delivery company called On the Spot to fill this need.
Bill began by listing his mobile telephone number 
in the Yellow Pages. He also sent letters to all those 
companies that had requested same-day courier service that his prior company had not been able to serve. 
He hoped that through good service and word-ofmouth advertising that his business would grow. He 
also began other advertising and marketing activities 
to promote his services.
At first, Bill received delivery requests on his business mobile phone. However, it was not long before 
his customers were asking if he had a Web site where 
they could place orders for shipments. He knew that if 
he could get a Web presence that he could increase his 
exposure and help his business grow.
After he had been in business only a few short 
months, Bill discovered he needed to have additional 
help. He hired another person to help with the delivery 
and pickup of packages. It was good to see the business 
grow, but another person added to the complexity of 
coordinating pickups and deliveries. With the addition 
of a new person, he could no longer “warehouse” the 
packages out of his delivery van. He now needed a central warehouse where he could organize and distribute 
packages for delivery. He thought that if his business 
grew enough to add one more delivery person that he 
would also need someone at the warehouse to coordinate the arrival and distribution of all the packages.
1. Who are the stakeholders for On the Spot? How 
involved should On the Spot’s customers be in 
system definition? As the business grows, who 
else might be potential stakeholders and interested in system functions?
2. If you were commissioned to build a system 
for Bill, how would you determine the requirements? Be specific in your answer. Make a list of 
the questions you need answered.
3. What technology and communication requirements do you see? What are the hardware requirements, and what kind of equipment will 
provide viable options to the system? What 
would you recommend to Bill?
4. What are the primary functional requirements 
for the system as described so far in the case?
Sandia Medical Devices
Medical monitoring technology has advanced significantly in the last decade. Monitoring that once 
required a visit to a health-care facility can now be 
performed by devices located in a patient’s home, or 
carried or worn at all times. Examples include measures of glucose level (blood sugar), pulse, blood pressure, and electrocardiogram (EKG). Measurements 
can be transmitted via telephone, Internet connection, 
and wireless data transmission standards, such as 
Bluetooth. A particularly powerful technology combination is a wearable device that records data periodically or continuously and transmits it via Bluetooth to 
a cell phone app. The cell phone app can inform the 
patient of problems and can automatically transmit 
data and alerts to a central monitoring application (see 
Figure 2-17).
Health-care providers and patients incur significant costs when glucose levels are not maintained 
within acceptable tolerances. Short-term episodes of 
very high or very low glucose often result in expensive 
visits to urgent care clinics or hospitals. In addition, 
patients with frequent but less severe episodes of high 
or low glucose are more susceptible to such expensive, 
long-term complications as vision, circulatory, and 
kidney problems.
Sandia Medical Devices (SMD), an Albuquerque 
manufacturer of portable and wearable medical monitoring devices, has developed a glucose monitor embedded in a wristband. The device is powered by body 
heat and senses glucose levels from minute quantities 
of perspiration. SMD is developing the Real-Time Glucose Monitoring (RTGM) device in partnership with 
New Mexico Health Systems (NMHS), a comprehensive health delivery service with patients throughout 
New Mexico. The system’s vision statement reads as 
follows:
RTGM will enable patients and their health-care 
providers to continuously monitor glucose levels, 
immediately identify short- and long-term medical dangers, and rapidly respond to those dangers 
in medically appropriate ways.
SMD will develop the initial prototype software 
for smartphones with Bluetooth capability running 
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
68 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
the Google Android operating system. If successful, 
NMHS and its patients will have free use of the software and SMD will resell the software to other health 
systems worldwide.
1. Who are RTGM’s stakeholders? Should 
NMHS’s patients be included in defining the 
system requirements? Why or why not? Should 
RTGM interact with medical professionals other 
than physicians? Why or why not?
2. If you were the lead analyst for RTGM, 
how would you determine the requirements? 
Be specific in your answer. List several questions 
you need answered.
3. What are the primary functional requirements 
for the system as described so far in the case?
4. Are the parameters for alerting patients and 
medical personnel the same for every patient? 
Can they vary over time for the same patient? 
What are the implications for the system’s functional requirements?
5. Briefly describe some possible nonfunctional requirements for RTGM.
Figure 2-17 Data movement among devices and users
Cell phone app
routes date and
interacts with
patient for alerts
and monitoring
Wristband continuously
measures glucose level
Data sent to/from
server via
wireless Internet
Server archives
data and
generates alerts
Medical personnel
monitor levels/trends
and plan response
Communication with
patient via voice
or text messages
Data transmitted
to cell phone
via Bluetooth
Soren Lauesen, Software Requirements: Styles and 
Techniques. Addison-Wesley, 2002.
Stan Magee, Guide to Software Engineering Standards and Specifications. Artech House, 1997.
Suzanne Robertson and James Robertson, Mastering the Requirements Process, Second Edition. 
Addison-Wesley, 2006.
Karl Wiegers, Software Requirements. Microsoft 
Press, 2003.
Karl Wiegers, More About Software Requirements: 
Thorny Issues and Practical Advice. Microsoft 
Press, 2006.
Ralph Young, The Requirements Engineering 
Handbook. Artech House, 2003.
FURTHER RESOURCES
© Blue Vista Design/
Shutterstock.com
© Rehan Qureshi/Shutterstock.com
© StockLite/Shutterstock.com
© Alexey Boldin/Shutterstock.com
© Jon Le-Bon/
Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
Explain why identifying user stories and 
use cases is the key to defining functional 
requirements
Write user stories with acceptance criteria
Describe the two techniques for identifying 
use cases
Apply the user goal technique to identify use 
cases
Apply the event decomposition technique to 
identify use cases
Describe the notation and purpose for the use 
case diagram
Draw use case diagrams by actor and by 
subsystem
Learning Objectives
User Stories and Use Cases
Use Cases and the User Goal Technique
Use Cases and Event Decomposition
Use Cases in the Ridgeline Mountain 
Outfitters Case
Chapter Outline
Identifying User Stories 
and Use Cases
CHAPTER three
Copyright 2016 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.
70 PART 2 ■ Systems Analysis Activities
■ Overview
Chapter 2 described the systems analysis activities used in system development and introduced the tasks and techniques involved when completing the 
first analysis activity—gathering information about the system, its stakeholders, and its requirements. An extensive amount of information is required to 
properly define the system’s functional and nonfunctional requirements. This 
chapter, with Chapter 4 and Chapter 5, presents techniques for documenting 
Opening case Waiters on Call Meal-Delivery System
Waiters on Call is a restaurant meal-delivery service 
started in 2010 by Sue and Tom Bickford. The Bickfords worked for restaurants while in college and always 
dreamed of opening their own restaurant; unfortunately, 
the initial investment was always out of reach. The Bickfords noticed that many restaurants offer takeout food, 
and that some restaurants—primarily pizzerias—offer 
home-delivery service. However, many people they 
met seemed to want home delivery with a wider food 
selection.
Sue and Tom conceived Waiters on Call as the best 
of both worlds: a restaurant service without the high 
initial investment. They contracted with a variety of 
well-known restaurants in town to accept orders from 
customers and to deliver the complete meals. After preparing the meal to order, the restaurant charges Waiters 
on Call a wholesale price, and the customer pays retail 
plus a service charge and tip when the meals are delivered. Waiters on Call started modestly, with only two 
restaurants and one delivery driver working the dinner 
shift. Business rapidly expanded, until the Bickfords realized they needed a custom computer system to support 
their operations. They hired a consultant, Sam Wells, to 
help them define what sort of system they needed.
“What events happen when you are running your 
business that make you want to reach for a computer?” 
asked Sam. “Tell me about what usually goes on.”
“Well,” answered Sue, “when a customer calls in 
wanting to order, I need to record it and get the information to the right restaurant. I need to know which drivers 
are available to pick up the order, so I need drivers to call 
in and tell me when they are free. Perhaps this could 
be included as a smartphone or iPad app. Sometimes, 
customers call back wanting to change their orders, so I 
need to find the original order and notify the restaurant 
to make the change.”
“Okay, that’s great. Now, how do you handle the 
money?” queried Sam.
Tom jumped in. “The drivers get a copy of the bill 
showing the retail price directly from the restaurant 
when they pick up the meal. The bill should agree with 
our calculations. The drivers collect that amount plus a 
service charge. When drivers report in at closing, we 
add up the money they have and compare it with the 
records we have. After all drivers report in, we need to 
create a deposit slip for the bank for the day’s total receipts. At the end of each week, we calculate what we 
owe each restaurant at the agreed-to wholesale price 
and send them a statement and check.”
“What other information do you need to get from 
the system?” continued Sam.
“It would be great to have some information at the 
end of each week about orders by restaurant and orders by area of town—things like that,” Sue said. “That 
would help us decide about advertising and restaurant 
contracts. Then, we need monthly statements for our 
accountant.”
Sam made some notes and sketched some diagrams as Sue and Tom talked. Then, after spending 
some time thinking about it, he summarized the situation for Waiters on Call. “It sounds to me like you need a 
system to use whenever these events occur”:
■ A customer calls in to place an order, so you need to 
Record an order.
■ A driver is finished with a delivery, so you need to 
Record delivery completion.
■ A customer calls back to change an order, so you 
need to Update an order.
■ A driver reports for work, so you need to Sign in the 
driver.
■ A driver submits the day’s receipts, so you need to 
Reconcile driver receipts.
Sam continues, “Then, you need the system to 
produce information at specific points in time—for 
example, when it is time to,”
■ Produce an end-of-day deposit slip.
■ Produce end-of-week restaurant payments.
■ Produce weekly sales reports.
■ Produce monthly financial reports.
“Am I on the right track?”
Sue and Tom quickly agreed that Sam was talking 
about the system in a way they could understand. They 
were confident that they had found the right consultant he functional requirements by creating a variety of models. These models are 
created as part of the analysis activity Define requirements, although remember 
that the analysis activities are actually done in parallel with design and implementation and in each iteration of the project.
In the Waiters on Call case, Sam Wells is working with the Bickfords to 
identify the functional requirements for the new system using the event decomposition technique. The sketch he was drawing was a use case diagram. You 
will learn about this technique and others that help identify user stories and use 
cases in this chapter.
■ User Stories and Use Cases
As you saw in Chapter 1, identifying user stories and use cases is a key task 
when defining functional requirements because these form the basis for the list 
of functions the system needs to carry out. Virtually all recent approaches to 
system development begin the requirements modeling activity with the concept 
of a user story or a use case. These two concepts are similar in that they focus 
on the goals of the user, and they show the list of functions at the appropriate 
level of detail. But they differ in the approach taken to identify them and in the 
amount of detail that is captured by the analyst. User stories are favored by 
highly Agile system development methodologies, and they are turned over to the 
programmer analyst much earlier than use cases are. The programmer analyst 
designs and codes each user story to discover needed details. The Agile development philosophy is to work directly with users and avoid doing too much 
documentation. In contrast, a use case approach traditionally meant analysts 
complete much documentation for each use case, focusing on detailed steps carried out by the user and the system. In practice, use cases can also be very brief 
for Agile development.
A user story is usually one short sentence in the everyday language of 
the end user that states what a user does as part of his or her work. In other 
words, a user story describes a goal the user has when using the system. 
User stories are a basic concept in Agile development because they focus on 
simplicity, value added, and user collaboration. They document the functional 
requirements quickly and less formally than traditional requirements modeling 
by focusing on who, what, and why for each function. The users and stakeholders are responsible for identifying the user stories.
In meetings with stakeholders, analysts encourage participants to write out 
each user story on an index card or on a shared whiteboard app. The objective 
is to get a potential user to articulate what he or she wants to do with the new 
system. A standard template helps users think through what they want and why 
they want it. The standard template for a user story looks like this:
“As a <role played>, I want to <goal or desire> so that <reason or benefit>.”
For example, some user stories for a bank teller might be:
■ “As a teller, I want to make a deposit to quickly serve more customers.”
■ “As a teller, I want to balance the cash drawer to assure there were no 
errors.”
As a customer of the bank using an ATM machine, some user stories might be:
■ “As a bank customer, I want to withdraw cash and feel confident the stack 
of cash I get is the correct amount.”
■ “As a bank customer, I want to deposit a check and feel confident the 
deposit is recorded correctly.”
