INT. HOUSE OF TOLERANCE - MORNING

EXTREME CLOSE UP: a man sleeps hard. His face fills the frame: it is dirty, creased, thick with stubble. His hair is matted with grease.

This is GAWAIN.

He is dreaming. His lips move in some buried murmur. His eyes flutter behind closed lids. For a moment it seems they might fly open - but no, he stays a-slumbering. In sleep his years melt away and after looking at him for long enough, one can almost see the boy he once was.

There are voices around him now, but he sleeps through them. He stirs, but does not awaken...

...until a pitcher of COLD WATER is thrown in his face. He jolts up with a start, sputtering, his dream receding.

He looks at his assailant: a half-dressed young woman with an empty pitcher (ESSEL).

ESSEL

Christ is born.

She turns away from him, pulling a tattered blanket around her shoulders. An impish grin appears on Gawain's face.

GAWAIN

Christ is born indeed.

He reaches out and makes a lascivious grope - the woman laughs and shrieks in jest and bats his hand away.


INT. HOUSE OF TOLERANCE - MOMENTS LATER

He gets up from where he was sleeping - a wooden bench in a hallway. He is wearing breeches and a loose shift. He stumbles barefoot down the stone corridors, wobbling on shaky feet. He is hungover. Probably still drunk.

The brothel he is in feels like an old monastery. He passes women who are getting dressed for Mass. Some of them laugh at him, others look at him with a familiar sort of pity.

He finds his heavy yellow cloak on the floor and lifts it, wrapping around his shoulders and fastening the chain at the neck. That reminds him to feel around his neck for his purse. He finds it, opens it. It's empty.

He doesn't seem too surprised by this. More amused than anything else. And anyway there's something else he's looking for.
 
2.

GAWAIN

My boots. Where are my boots?

He pushes open a wooden door to stone baths, where women are bathing, and shuts it again.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

I'm just looking for my boots.

He makes it to the front door of the brothel and pushes it open...


EXT. HOUSE OF TOLERANCE - CONTINUOUS

...to find a crisp gray winter day. The sky is thick and blanched with snow that hasn't started falling yet. There is smoke rising from everywhere: a hundred hearths, a hundred stoves, their respective plumes combining to veil the sky and shroud the CASTLE looming over all of them in the distance.

Church bells ring. Christ is born. Gawain leans over and retches.


EXT. HORSE HITCH - MOMENTS LATER

Gawain, boot-free, hobbles over frozen ground. He makes it to the hitching post behind the brothel. Here he finds his horse, a white mare named GRYNGELOT.

He pats her on her neck and then hauls himself up onto her back.

He's about to spur her onward when he realizes she's still tied to her post, and he leans down to undo the reins and in doing so slips off her back altogether, landing in his back the frozen mud. He can't help but laugh.

He sits up, groggily, and then, just before he reattempts to mount his horse, he looks DIRECTLY AT THE CAMERA and WINKS.

EXT. CITADEL - MORNING

Gawain rides Gryngelot at a brisk trot through the the village that lies within the castle walls, his muddy cloak streaming behind him. Everyone is headed to the cathedral for morning Mass, peasants and nobles alike. He passes children begging, their hands outstretched towards him. He throws them his empty purse.
 
3.

INT. CATHEDRAL - MORNING

Gawain stumbles into the Cathedral, amidst the teeming crowds in the back. The mass has yet to begin.

He pushes his way towards the front, just as the MAIN DOORS swing open...

...and the procession of the BISHOP, his DEACONS and ALTAR BOYS makes their way down the center aisle, followed by...

THE KING AND QUEEN, and all their attending parties.

The Royal Party is older, their hair turned silver, both still beautiful and luminous but showing their decades. They walk slowly. These are waning days for them both.

As they walk down the aisle, the sun comes out and blasts through the huge, circular stained glass window above the altar, anointing them with morning light as the bells continue to ring.

The Queen glances to the side and notices Gawain there in the crowd, all ragged filth, with no boots on.

He grins and bows his head to her.

CUT TO BLACK

PART ONE: THE CHRISTMAS GAME


INT. CASTLE COURTYARD - DAY

Snow is falling now. Holiday festivities abound in the courtyards surrounding the castle.

Gawain walks past vendors with steaming cauldrons of wassail and coals piled high with vegetables and tubers. Tinkers with entire cabinets of wares strapped to their backs lumber about. Livestock squeal and flutter about. Children run about, sliding on the ice that's formed over the mud.

A WINTER JOUSTING TOURNAMENT is transpiring behind him. Lances splintering, armor clanging, horses running counter to each other.

He stops at a stand with jewelry and other antiquities for sale. He sees a little golden CRUCIFIX.

Suddenly...

MOTHER

Pssstt....
 
4.

He looks up and sees his MOTHER. A Noblewoman in her 40s, clothed in elegant, expensive holiday garb.

MOTHER (cont'd)
Where have you been? The King,
he's asking for you!


INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBERS - DAY

In a chamber in a fine home near the castle, she helps him wash, scrubbing the mud and grime from the back of his neck. As exasperated as a mother might be.

MOTHER
You're his nephew. The time has
come to act it.

GAWAIN

He has all his heroes...

MOTHER

All his heroes are old.

GAWAIN

I'm getting old now too.

MOTHER

With nothing to show for it.

She throws the dirty water out the window. When she turns back around, Gawain is holding out that gold crucifix for her.

GAWAIN

For you. For the Christmas.

She doesn't know what to make of it.

MOTHER

Where did you get this?

GAWAIN

Does it matter?

She's touched. She takes it, looking it over, pressing it in her hands. Then she grabs him by his ears and kisses him atop his head.

MOTHER

Silly Boy.
 
5.

INT. CASTLE - GRAND HALL - DAY

Gawain, now dressed in a fine tunic and a clean cloak, marches with his Mother down a wide candlelit corridor that opens up into the GRAND HALL of the castle.

The space is defined by the ROUND TABLE within it - a huge loop of stone, ensnaring a good three quarters of the hall with an open space for passage through to its center.

Carved into the stone at each place are lithographs of battles.

A pictorial history of this court's chivalry and bravery.

At each place is a KNIGHT. Each is dressed similarly in darker tones, with a silver cross hanging from their neck to denote their stature. Each has a sword laid at his side on the table as well. Some are accompanied by wives, but most are on their lonesome. There are a few empty chairs.

THE KINGS and QUEEN are at the head, raised slightly on a dais. Above their heads are magnificent portraits of them at the height of their glory. Their lords and ladies in waiting cluster near them in perfect formation, more decorative than anything else.

Gawain looks for a place near the end of the circle, but The KING sees him and beckons him come closer. There is an empty seat at his right side, a grander one, not quite a throne like the King's but certainly ornate. The letter L is engraved in its back piece.

KING

Come, come.

GAWAIN

I?

KING
Sit beside us. Beside me and my
Queen.

GAWAIN

That is not my place.

QUEEN
Its yours for today, at least. Its
owner is away,	and who knows when
he may return.

Gawain glances at his Mother, who urges him on.

The King extends a hand - which is old and creased and seems nearly translucent. Gawain takes it as he sits down, and the King holds it tight.
 
6.

KING
It is so very good to see you,
Gawain. It is good to have family
by one's side. One's own blood.

His voice is firm but whispery. His affection does not go unnoticed by his court. Gawain can feel the eyes of the other knights upon him.

GAWAIN

Surely you have spilt enough blood with your knights - they are closer to thee than any brother or son.

KING

True.

He looks out over the rest of his court, keeping Gawain's hand clutched tightly in his own.

KING (cont'd)
I look upon my friends here today
and see songs no muse could dream
of, much less sing. But I turn to
you and see...what? I recognize
you but do not know thee. I say
this not in reproach but out of
regret - that I have never asked
you to sit beside me before, in
all the years since you've been
born, that I have not been there
for your matriculation.

KING (cont'd)

But now it is Christmas, and before I make merry, make for me a gift. Tell me a tale of thyself, so I might know thee.

GAWAIN
(hanging his head)
I have none to tell, King.

QUEEN

Yet.

GAWAIN

My Queen?

QUEEN
None to tell yet. Lift thy head,
Gawain. What do you see?
 
7.

GAWAIN

I see...I see legends.

QUEEN
Do not take your place among them
idly.

A tiny smile escapes her lips. She is as aged as the king but seems to shine from within, her white hair glowing like a veil.

The King changes course now. He lets go of Gawain's hand and surveys his other guests.

KING

Who else then...

He stands and CALLS OUT to the congregants in his hall.

KING (cont'd)
Friends - dear friends. Before we
celebrate the birth of our Lord,
let us celebrate one of our own
who has done great things in his
name. What tale or show have thee
for me, for thy king? Who can
regale me with some myth or canto
of thine own purport?

The Knights turn and murmur amongst each other. Wondering who should speak, which story to tell. But they dilly-dally too long, for suddenly...

...the GREAT DOORS SWING OPEN, as if by a mighty wind. The multitude of candles in the hall flicker, and some go out. Curlicues of snow dance through the air...

...and a figure appears! First in silhouette: A MAN ON A HORSE.

Then these paired shadows emerge into full resolve, and the hall lets out a collective gasp.

Both man and beast seem nearly double the size of any normal horse and rider. The horse's hoof-steps make the entire hall tremble. And the rider - the rider is a huge man, with a beard to match. Both he and his steed are clad in armor and garments that have the texture of petrified wood. At the knight's side is slung a huge AXE that glitters in the light; in his hand is held a tremendous bough of holly.

Most notable of all about this intruder is that both he and his horse are a deep and fecund shade of GREEN. From head to toe, from axe to hoof, they are green. Like statuary, overtaken by the finest moss.
 
8.

SWORDS ARE DRAWN all around the round table, but the knight raises the holly bough above his head - an offering of peace.

The King holds up his hand. He regards this stranger.

Then he beckons him come closer.

The horse snorts, its nostrils steaming. The knight rides forward, through the parting in the round table, keeping the branch held aloft.

Then, when he reaches the King's place, he reaches into his breastplate and produces a LETTER, blazing white against all that green and stamped with a green wax seal and the words: LEND ME THY VOICE.

He holds it out to the Queen.

The Queen looks to the King, who nods. Then she rises and takes it from the Green Knight's hand.

Gawain watches closely.

She breaks the seal with trembling hands and unfolds the parchment. It is covered in tiny, intricate handwriting.

The horse snorts again. The Green Knight's breathing is audible too, heavy and raspy.

She clears her throat and begins to read - but the voice that comes out of her mouth is not her own. It is a deep and raspy, like dry leaves in the wind. It strikes terror into the heart of everyone in the Hall.

QUEEN
Oh Greatest Of Kings, Indulge Me
in this Friendly Christmas Game:
let whomever is so bold amongst
you step forth, take up arms and
try with honor to land a blow
against me. He who manages to
knick me shall have this weapon at
my side as their prize.

At this, the Green Knight brandishes the axes at his side. It seems almost enchanted, the way it gleams in the light, and the handle is bedecked with emeralds.

The Queen continues to read.

QUEEN (cont'd)
But!
(MORE)
 
9.

QUEEN (cont'd) (CONT’D)
One year and Yuletide hence, he or
she must seek me out yonder to the
North, at the Green Chapel, bend a
knee and give me opportunity to
match that blow. Be it a scratch
on the check or a cut on the
shoulder, I will return what was
given to me, and then in trust and
friendship we shall part. Who is
willing to engage with me?

She lowers the letter, and the sinks back into her chair, as if suddenly awakening from a trance.

KING

This challenge is your own?

The Green Knight smiles, spreads his arms and bows his head.

Though mute, the twinkle in his eyes speaks volumes.

KING (cont'd)
Well. Once I would have lept
across the table to spar with you.
In my mind I still might, but my
body - my body would not follow.
Surely, though, there is one
amongst us here who will meet you
on your terms.

Gawain shoots up from his chair, so eager that his seat nearly tips from the dais.

GAWAIN

I will do it!

There is a murmur in the hall. Gawain's Mother is taken aback.

The King turns to his nephew, surprised, but pleased. Gawain reasserts his intentions.

GAWAIN (cont'd)
I will meet him.
(to the Knight)
I will meet you.

The Green Knight peers at Gawain, sizing him up. And then he nods and dismounts from his horse. He throws the holly branch down on the ground - a line in the sand, as it were - and heaves the axe into his right hand.

Gawain rises from his chair. The King grabs him by the arm, whispers quietly -
 
10.

KING

Do you understand this challenge?

GAWAIN

I do. I think I do.

KING

Remember, it is only a game.

Gawain nods, and then turns to the knight seated beside him.

GAWAIN

Your sword, may I borrow it?

This knight glances warily at the King, and then nods and lifts his sword from where it rests against the table and hands it to Gawain. Gawain UNSHEATHES it...

...and then LEAPS ACROSS the table, knocking over a pitcher as he does so. The wine runs into the inlets of the carvings of the table, filling them one line at a time.

Gawain approaches the Green Knight, who remains on one side of the holly branch on the ground.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

Have at me, Green Knight.

He takes the sword in both hands. WE SLIPS INTO SLOW MOTION FOR A MOMENT as Gawain steadies his stance. All signs point towards a magnificent duel...

...except that the Knight just stands there.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

Make a move or I shall make mine.

The Knight smiles. That twinkle in his eye again!

And then he drops his axe to the ground - it lands with a tremendous clang.

The King is suddenly concerned, and leans forward to see better. As does Gawain's mother.

Gawain is confused.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

What is this?

In response, the Green Knight drops to one knee.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

Will you not fight?
 
11.

The Knight lowers his head.

GAWAIN (cont'd)

Fight me. I am ready.

The Knight pulls back his hair, exposing the green skin of his neck.

GAWAIN (cont'd)
(hushed)
You make a fool of me?

The Knight's shoulders heave in a long sigh. Then he remains still, prostrate before Gawain.

The Queen looks at the King. She is just about ready to put a stop to this charade when -

GAWAIN (cont'd)
Very well. You laid down your
challenge. I accepted it and
accept it still.

He lifts his borrowed sword high above him...

...and then BRINGS IT DOWN upon the Green Night's neck.

It cuts through clean, clean as can be. The Green Knight's head is SEVERED and falls to the ground with a thud.

It rolls away, coming to an unseemly stop at the base of the table.

The court gasps in unison.

The body remains kneeling. Blood gushes from the neck, first in great jets and then in shorter spurts. Red blood on all that green - quite Christmasy indeed.

Gawain is out of breath, wild eyed, incensed, vindicated. He stares at his foe, gradually grasping what it is he's done.

And then the green body slumps over.

Gawain turns and faces the king, bloodied sword in hand, looking for approval for what he's done.

But the King is not looking at him. Nor is the Queen.

They're looking at the headless Green corpse behind him...

...which is moving.
 
12.

Its arms flail about, and then find the ground and push the body back up into a kneeling position. From there, on slightly wobbly legs, it stands. It turns towards where its head has rolled...

...at which point the eyes on the severed head open.

Again, the court responds in unity - cries of horror and dread as the body staggers towards its head.

Gawain by now has turned to see this madness. The smile on his lips has fully faded, replaced by a look if disbelief.

The Green Knight's body picks up his head by the hair and then carries it towards Gawain.

It holds the head up, so that it can look Gawain in the eye.

Which it does.

And then, the head of the Green Knight speaks, in a terrible, ragged, drawn out whisper.

GREEN KNIGHT

One...year...hence.

As the head speaks, the gaping throat on the body bobs and opens in time with the words.

Gawain's eyes widen in terror.

The Head begins to laugh. It's body promptly turns and hops onto his horse. The horse rears back, neighing wildly, and its headless rider spurs it towards the great doors.

It rides out of the Great Hall, still laughing...


EXT. CASTLE / CITADEL - CONTINUOUS

...and gallops away from the castle, through the citadel and out the great gates, head held high all the while, its deep raspy cackle fading in the winter winds.


INT. GREAT HALL - CONTINUOUS

Everyone is looking at one another, uncomfortable, uncertain with what has transpired. There are many murmurs, concerned voices...

...until someone LAUGHS.

And then begins to clap.
 
13.

That is just the release the court was looking for. Of course - this was just a performance, a show! Everyone begins to applaud, to pound their goblets on the table. The servants take that as a sign that the Christmas feast is to begin, and they begin to carry food in. Musicians begin to play music.

But Gawain does not share in this merriment.

He looks first to his Mother, who has no words.

His sword clatters to the ground, where the Knight's axe still rests, and where his blood is running into a circle around the inner loop of the table, just as the wine filled the engraved surface, coloring all that history red.

Gawain turns now and looks at the King. His face is full of anxious questions...

...to which the King has no answer. He simply clasps his hands together and gazes gravely at Gawain as the Christmas feast ensues around them.


INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - DAY

The Axe is wrapped in brown swaddling cloth.

It is placed at the bottom of an empty chest.

The chest is SLAMMED SHUT and LOCKED.

CUT TO BLACK

PART TWO: ANOTHER YEAR


EXT. CITADEL - DAY

The ice is melting. Spring is on the way. Little flowers are emerging in the valley outside the castle. Birds are singing.

A herald rides into frame, heads through the village, exits again as he heads towards the castle.


INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - DAY

Gawain lays in bed, a pillow over his head.

MOTHER

Gawain. Gawain, wake up.

Gawain groans from beneath the pillow.
 
14.

MOTHER (cont'd)
Will you go to your father's grave
with me?
(beat)
I said, will you go to father's
grave with me?


EXT. GRAVEYARD - DAY

At a cemetery near the church, Gawain and his Mother stand before a grave.

The Mother prays furiously in Latin, nodding her head penitently.

In the background, a few passerby's notice them. A child with his parents, looking up at him curiously. Gawain can't help but notice them back.


EXT. CITADEL - DAY

They wander back through the city.

MOTHER

Will you go? When the year is up?

GAWAIN
No. It was trickery. It was all in
jest.

MOTHER

I know, but...

GAWAIN

Do you not think so?

MOTHER
Perhaps it is all trickery,
but...I fear that maybe the
trick's not finished.

A beat.

GAWAIN

Surely you don't want me to go.

She doesn't answer.

GAWAIN (cont'd)
I'm happy right where I am. I did
my part. I faced him. It's
finished.
 
15.

EXT. VALLEY - DAY

Summer has fallen on the valley. Farmers are finishing up their work in the fields.

Soldiers in torch-lit watchtowers keep a high lookout for intruders.


EXT. STABLE - DAY

Gawain sits in a stable, cleaning one of Gryngelot's hooves.

Suddenly he hears trumpets blaring. Both he and horse lift their heads, prick up their ears.


EXT. CITADEL - DAY

Gawain pushes through the crowds of onlookers to see...

SOLDIERS, marching through the streets.

One of them sees Gawain from atop his horse.

SOLDIER
Gawain! Come! Stand by our side
and fight with us!

GAWAIN

Not a chance.

SOLDIER

Don't you wish to be a knight?

GAWAIN
I wish to live, not die over some
pecuniary dispute amongst
landowners!

SOLDIER

Would you tell that to the King?

GAWAIN

It is not the King who asked!

The soldier shakes his head in disappointment. He turns to his commanding officer and points at Gawain. Gawain takes this opportunity to slip away.


INT. TAVERN - DAY

Gawain is passed out cold, a tankard at his elbow.
 
16.

After a while, an old drunk peasant pokes at him.

DRUNK

Hey. Hey, you're he, aren't you?

Gawain raises his head.

DRUNK (cont'd)

You slew the Green Knight.

Gawain forces a smile.


INT. HOUSE OF TOLERANCE - DAY

Now he lies naked in bed with Essel, who below the frame is trying to tease him to attention.

ESSEL

What did it feel like?

GAWAIN

Like cutting a melon in two.

ESSEL

And what does that feel like?

GAWAIN
Like it's easier than it should
be.

Her hand is getting tired and she stops, rubbing her wrist.

ESSEL
Behold Gawain, chopper of heads,
severer of melons...

Gawain laughs awkwardly.

ESSEL (cont'd)

...who cannot get it up.


EXT. CITADEL - NIGHT

Gawain is in the middle of a street brawl. He is rolling on the muddy cobbles with a fellow drunkard, younger than he but bigger. His friends are watching from the side, cheering on as he wails at the poor sap. He is not fighting fair.

After much scrabbling, he emerges victorious, bruised and bloodied, his eye swollen, but conscious - which is more than can be said for the other fellow. He laughs obnoxiously as his friends help him to his feet. Once on his feet, he sees a passing woman and eyes are with leery intent.
 
17.

INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - LATER

The drunk revelry has carried back to Gawain's place. They burst through the door, trying to keep quiet but failing.

IN HER QUARTERS UPSTAIRS, Gawain's Mother pretends to be asleep as they gather around the trunk.

Gawain inserts a key into the lock of the trunk and lifts the lid. He pulls back the cloth. The axe glimmers darkly in its dim recesses.

One of the friends grabs it by the handle, but struggles to lift it.

FRIEND

What is it made of?

Gawain shrugs. Another friend pries at the jewels embedded in the handle.

FRIEND	2
There must be more where this came
from...


EXT. CITADEL - NIGHT

OVERHEAD SHOT as Gawain and his friends head off with much drunken merriment to the outskirts of the village. Gawain carries the axe, wrapped it its blanket. Someone has had an idea - they are on a mission.


EXT. WITCH'S HUT - NIGHT

They reach a hut at the edge of the village. One of the friends knocks at the door, and then knocks again until finally it opens...

...and THE WITCH appears in the doorway. She is a beautiful woman of indeterminate age.

She immediately looks past the others, her eyes zeroing in on Gawain as if she has been expecting him.

She looks at him and the bundle in his arms, and then motions for them to enter.


INT. WITCH'S HUT - NIGHT

The hut is actually a large stone cottage, shaped like an igloo.
 
18.

An opening in the center lets the smoke from the fire in the center of the room escape.

Gawain glances around. He has been in here before. Jars and crockery line the shelves, filled with all manner of chemicals and liquids and other unseemly things.

The Axe is set down upon a long wooden table and unwrapped.

The Witch leans in close to the blade. She puts her ear to it. It hums with a strange frequency, like a tuning fork whose one note does not decay.

WITCH

I hear no hex.

She taps at the metal with an iron rod. Then she selects a vial from her shelves and splashes a few drops of liquid onto the metal. It instantly steams and hisses, like acid, but burns off the blade leaving it unblemished.

WITCH (cont'd)
It will not betray its
history...but maybe it's future
can be divined. You can chase it
down...grab it by the tail...

There is a cauldron in the center of the room, over the stove. It is wide and shallow, more like a wok. With tongs she takes two coals from the fire and drops them into this basin. (to Gawain) Step closer, closer.

Gawain steps to the cauldron. The Witch hands him a jar, full of macerated herbs.

WITCH (cont'd)

Drink.

Gawain takes the jar. He glances at his friends for support. Uncertain, somewhat repulsed, he nevertheless chokes down a few sips of the putrid liquid.

WITCH (cont'd)

Now shut...

She brushes her hand over his eyes. He closes them.

WITCH (cont'd)
I'll guide you to the door...and
stand with you at the threshold to
see what lays beyond...

She then takes RIGHT HAND and puts it on the handle of the axe, helping him take a grasp.
 
19.

Then, in his left, she places what looks to be a white stone. About the size of a quail egg. It is MERCURY SALT. She closes his fingers around it and squeezes his fist in hers. Clenching and unclenching her fingers over his, compelling him to do the same.

Now he has the mercury stone in his left hand, the axe in his right, a fermented potion somewhere in his guts and a funny feeling in his head.

The Witch whispers some incantation in his ear, and then guides his left hand out over the cauldron.

WITCH (cont'd)

Let go. Let it go and look.

He opens his hand, turns it over. The mercury salt falls into the shallow cauldron. His gaze follows them down.

The moment it touches the coals, a sudden and unsettling CHEMICAL REACTION occurs. The white stone begin to sprout brown tendrils that coil up and over each other, spiring higher and higher. They look like tree branches, roots. They look like spinal cords. They look like snakes. They defy the laws of physics. The pattern of their growth is hypnotic.

Gawain stares at this, transfixed. The tendrils just keep growing, out and up and towards him, rippling with internal fractal geometry.

WITCH (cont'd)

Breathe in...

The fumes they produce drift upwards, invading Gawain's nostrils, seeping into his brain.

Almost instantly, he is no longer on this plane of existence. His eyes gaze upwards, at the opening the ceiling directly above him.

The opening begins to EXPAND.

We PUSH THROUGH IT...into the summer night sky...

...where we remain for a time, watching constellations drift past.

Eventually, another PLANET comes into view. A second earth.

Rotating into our orbit.

WE PUSH TOWARDS THIS PLANET...not too quickly, but soon the clouds are swirling towards us...
 
20.

EXT. NEW CASTLE - DAY

...and then we are through them. Descending gracefully towards a great castle, under construction...


INT. THRONE ROOM - DAY

No we are in the RUINS of THRONE ROOM, which is full of hundreds of congregants, garbed in clay-colored rags.

Sitting in the throne at the front of the room, a tame lion sitting at one side and a swan on the other, is Gawain.

He is older but not by much.

A BISHOP is standing before him. Placing a GREEN CROWN atop his head. It touches his brow...

...and then his head combusts. Igniting in a great and all-consuming flame. As it burns...


EXT. WITCH'S HUT - DAY

...we retract back through the opening in the Witch's roof.

The vision is over.

Gawain lets out a deep, choked exhale.

So does the Witch, who we see has been holding Gawain's hand this entire time.


EXT. RIVER - NIGHT

Gawain THROWS THE AXE into the RIVER that feeds the castle moat.

It sinks quickly, and without a trace.


EXT. VILLAGE - DAY

Autumn has fallen on the village.

The trees are losing their leaves. A cool wind picks at them.


INT. HOUSE OF TOLERANCE - DAY

Gawain sits on a bed, faced slightly away from Essel, whose belly has begun to swell.
 
21.

GAWAIN

You can't know for certain though.

ESSEL
No.
(beat)
But the other girls say it must be
yours. They say it must be of
royal stock because it won't come
away like it's supposed to when I
take the herbs. It's too strong,
they say, and so I'm stuck with
it. I know that don't mean
anything but...maybe it does...

Gawain plays with a kitten that runs across the floor.

ESSEL (cont'd)

What should I do?

GAWAIN

Do what you like.

He places the kitten on the windowsill, reaches into his purse and deposits some coins on her table.


INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - DAY

Gawain returns to his chamber. Clambering in, a little inebriated. It takes him a while to realize...

...that the KING is there, sitting by the window. So still that he almost seems like a shadow at first.

He hesitates, sussing up the reality of this situation. Then he drops to his knee.

KING

No, no no. Sit, sit before me.

Gawain does so. He notices that his Mother is there.

KING (cont'd)
Winter is coming. Another year
passed. Have you thought of what
you might do?

GAWAIN

Regarding what?

KING

Oh...that Green Knight.
 
22.

GAWAIN

That was a trick. It was nothing.

KING

Are you certain?

GAWAIN

No one has said otherwise.

KING

Does it matter what others say? It is you who accepted the challenge.

GAWAIN

And was made a fool of.

KING
Not so foolish. You have your
head.
(beat)
I've been thinking about the future. And I think it would behoove you...to go. Seek him out. If it was a trick, well...but if it wasn't...

GAWAIN

What if death awaits me?

KING

I don't know a man who hasn't marched up to it before his time.

GAWAIN

My King, I fear I would not march back.

KING

You fear...you fear. You fear. Fear can be a gift if you get ahead of it. But you, you've been walking in it shadow.

GAWAIN
Stop talking of shadows and say
what you mean.

KING
What I mean is: you are not the
man you ought to be.

GAWAIN

Why hold me in this light?
 
23.

KING

Why? Make no mistake, I could look the other way when you pass me.

KING (cont'd)

I could have you dispatched with a wave of my hand. But I care for you. You are my Mother's boy. I have no children of my own. Is it wrong to want greatness for you?

GAWAIN
Maybe I am not meant for
greatness.

KING
Then, at the very least, can I
hope for goodness?
(beat)
Think about it, at least.

GAWAIN

I have been.

KING

I know. I know you have.

He reaches down and lifts up a parcel. He unwraps it.

It is the axe.

KING (cont'd)

But think harder.

He rises to go. Putting a hand to Gawain's face.


INT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - DAY

Gawain sits and watches his Mother prepare food. As still and silent as we've ever seen him.

He watches her for a long time. Stirring as the pot comes to a boil. She seems angry.

Suddenly, and just for a moment, he is overcome with emotion.

He wipes his eyes, stifles tears.

She doesn't notice.

He swallows it all down and then says:

GAWAIN

I love you, Mother.
 
24.

She turns suddenly and throws the spoon at him, spattering soup everywhere.


EXT. VILLAGE - DAY

The first flakes of snow fall from the sky.

It is ALL SAINT'S DAY - November first.


INT. CATHEDRAL - DAY

The Mother kneels in her stone pew at mass. The priest, off-screen, is intoning in Latin.

Something weighs heavy on her heart.


EXT. CITADEL - DAY

The Mother walks home from mass. Pulling her shawl over her shoulders as a cold wind blows. She seems to move more slowly with each step.

A CLANKING comes from around a bend in the road: a troop of SIX SOLDIERS comes clamoring her way, their armor making a great deal of noise.

It is the KING'S GUARD.

They stop in front of her. She stops too.

They stare at one another.


EXT. GAWAIN'S CHAMBER - DAY

Gawain is sound asleep under the covers when...

...a hand grabs him by the shoulder and YANKS HIM suddenly, violently OUT OF BED. He lands hard, wide awake, sputtering, looking up at whomever has assailed him.

It is THE KING'S GUARD, all six of them crowded into the chambers, and two of them now GRAB HIM BY THE ARMS and hoist him up...

GAWAIN

What...why are you...

He is dragged kicking and screaming out of the room, wearing only his pants.
 
25.

EXT. VILLAGE - DAY

They forcefully escort him down the cobbled streets of the village, one holding each of his arms.

GAWAIN
Where are you taking me? On who's
order are you taking me? The
King's? Did the King do this?

They drag him pass the brothel. He sees Essel looking up at him from the doorway with the other girls. She glances up at him and then turns away as someone takes her hand and pulls her inside.

As they reaches the edge of the citadel, the great wooden GATES SWING OPEN with an ominous groan...


EXT. GATES - CONTINUOUS

Gawain is forcefully thrown across the threshold of the gates. He stumbles to the frozen ground. Gryngelot is waiting there, laden with goods and supplies for a journey. There is a sword, and a shield with a five-pointed-star on it.

One of the Guards pitches a rucksack his way. A loaf of bread spills out.

Another places the bundle containing the Green Knight's Axe on the ground, just past the line of the gates.

Then they both step back behind the walls, standing in perfect imposing formation.

Gawain's MOTHER steps out from behind them now. She approaches him, putting her hands to his head.

MOTHER
Go now. Be a man. Be a man of your
word. Come back to me strong, with
your head held high.

Her eyes are full of tears, but she remains firm. She does not kiss him, or embrace him. She turns and walks back behind the gates and stands with the guards.

Gawain stares angrily at his mother, at the village and castle beyond, as the gates slowly, fatefully begin go close.

He stares them down until the the two great doors come together as one, sealing his banishment.

His expulsion.

His destiny.

He doesn't take it lightly, or well. He runs up and beats his fists against the gates, shouting, screaming out, crying, but no one listens. The Guards at the watchtower remain impassive, ignore him.


EXT. VALLEY - DAY

Music builds over the course of one long shot.

CAMERA LEADS as Gawain bitterly rides away from his home, into the valley. The castle and village and their walls loom behind him at first, but grow fainter and fainter in the mist. Gradually fading away.

Soon they are altogether gone. As if vanished, as if they were never even there. Now there's just a man and his horse and the land.

CUT TO BLACK

PART THREE: THE JOURNEY OUT


EXT. CAMP - NIGHT

Camp has been made. A bedroll and a blanket on the hard ground.

He huddles by a fire, looking for the stars in the night sky.

They never appear.


EXT. VALLEY - DAWN

He rides through fields in the early dawn. The sky is white and misty. The sun isn't visible. There don't even seem to be shadows on the ground.


EXT. FARMLANDS - DAY

LATERAL DOLLY SHOT: he rides past a SHARECROPPER AND HIS WIFE, both elderly and weathebeaten, hacking at the frozen mud of their field, trying to unmoor a plow. They looks up at him as he passes and then turns back to her work.

We dolly with Gawain as he passes the farmer, keeps riding and then thinks better of it and rides back to the two farmers. He addresses the man.

GAWAIN

Pardon me.
 
27.

The man looks at him, but it's his wife who responds.

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE

What's that?

Gawain looks at her, and then turns back to the husband.

GAWAIN

I was wondering if -

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE
Talk to me, not him. He can't
talk. Talk to me. Are you a
knight?

GAWAIN

No.

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE

You're kitted like one.

GAWAIN
These are just...this is nothing.
Can you tell me which direction am
I headed?

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE You're a knight and you don't know which direction you're headed?

GAWAIN
I'm not a knight. And there were
no stars last night and no sun
this morning and now I am at a
loss.

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE
Well...help me loose this plow and
then I'll set you on your way.

GAWAIN
Would that I could, madame, but
there's no time.

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE Bring your horse. It'll be free in jif.

GAWAIN

Another time!

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE
But you don't know where you're
going!
 
28.

GAWAIN

Do you know of a Green Chapel that lies in the North?

SHARECROPPER'S WIFE

No.

GAWAIN

Then you are as in the dark as I!

He rides on, leaving the two sharecroppers behind. We continue to DOLLY with him for quite some time.


EXT. PLAINS - DUSK

Gryngelot grazes on the high plains.

Gawain squats some ways away, tending to his ablutions.


EXT. CREEK - DAY

He drinks from a creek.


EXT. PINE FOREST - DAY

He rides through a pine forest.

He pauses to examine the moss on the trees, in an attempt to ascertain his direction.

Then he hears something - the snapping of a twig.

Looking up, he spots a RED FOX darting through the trees. It pauses for a moment -

- makes EYE CONTACT with him -

GAWAIN

Hello, you.

-	and then hurries on its way, scampering off to who knows where.

In its wake, Gawain notices something else.

TWO ARMORED LEGS.

He puts his hand on his sword and rides forward.

Indeed, there is a KNIGHT there, leaning against a tree. Dead as a doornail, his body decomposing in his armor.
 
29.

Behind the visor of his helmet is a mummified face. An arrow pierces his side. There is a SILVER CROSS around his neck that matches those of the other knights at the round table.

Gawain notices more arrows in the trees ahead.

He rides on...


EXT. BATTLEFIELD - CONTINUOUS

...out onto a BATTLEFIELD.

There are hundreds of corpses scattered on the field. Mouldering bones in rusting armor. The mud they lay in is still a ruddy crimson.

There are vultures picking at what skeletons still have bits of flesh on them.

Gryngelot doesn't want to push through, but Gawain spurs her on. They set out across the field of corpses. Past all the dead soldiers.

A cold breeze blows but other than that, it is eerily calm and still.

Up ahead now he sees a SCAVENGER digging through the corpses for any spare jewels are armor.

The scavenger looks up at him, makes eye contact, freezes like a deer caught in headlights.

SCAVENGER

Who are you?

GAWAIN

Just a traveler. I come in peace.

SCAVENGER

You want a share I expect?

GAWAIN

Of what?

The Scavenger gestures to the bodies around them.

GAWAIN (cont'd)
Nay. Why were they not given a
Christian burial?

SCAVENGER
(shrugging)
All dead.
(MORE)
 
30.

SCAVENGER (CONT’D)

No one left to bury them.

GAWAIN

You might give them that courtesy after you've picked them clean.

SCAVENGER

Would you help?

GAWAIN

...There are too many.

SCAVENGER

My mind precisely. Nature will do the job. She'll suck them down into the peat and tuck them in tight. Where do you go?

GAWAIN
To the Green Chapel. Do you know
of it?

SCAVENGER

The Green Chapel? Ahhhh...perhaps. There's a stream yonder? And if you follow it for half a day or so? You'll come to a chapel. At least I think it's a chapel. Now it's not green on the whole but it is definitely green-ish, on account of the moss and such. It's mostly ruins now but perhaps it's what you seek.

GAWAIN

The stream is yonder?

SCAVENGER

Yes. Up past the field, where the forest rises.

GAWAIN

I will seek it out.

SCAVENGER
And, good sir, are my services
worth anything to you?

GAWAIN

My thanks.

SCAVENGER

Nothing else?
 
31.

GAWAIN

I travel light.

SCAVENGER

Surely a knight such as yourself -

GAWAIN

I am not a knight.

SCAVENGER
Than a noble such as yourself
could spare something for a wretch
like myself. You are of noble
blood. I can tell.

Gawain hesitates.

SCAVENGER (cont'd)
Just a kindness. That's all I ask
for.

Gawain reaches into his purse and produces a coin.

GAWAIN

Here. A kindness.

He flips it to the scavenger, who catches it and then, with sudden slight of hand, makes it vanish.

SCAVENGER
My thanks to you sir. Remember.
The stream.

He turns back to one of the bodies.


EXT. STREAM - DAY

The battlefield is still visible in the background when Gawain arrives at the stream in question.

He dismounts so that Gryngelot may drink. He leads the horse to the water and then leans down himself and cups his hands together. But before he can drink...

...a DAGGER is pressed into his neck.

A THIEF stands behind him. There's another to his left with a club.

No words are exchanged. The situation is clear. Gawain rocks back on his haunches, looking angrily at the two thieves.

The SCAVENGER then appears in the copse of trees.
 
32.

He reaches to Gawain's ear, pulls out the coin that Gawain gave him and then flips it in the air.

SCAVENGER

T'weren't enough.

He gestures to Gawain's chest. The Thief With The Dagger pulls Gawain's purse from out of his shirt and cuts the cord that held it around his neck. Gawain tries to get away but the Thief jams the dagger back against his throat.

The Thief With The Club goes to Gryngelot and begins to untie the saddle bags. He pulls the sword out of Gawain's scabbard and throws it to the Scavenger. The Scavenger looks it up and down, pleased to see such a fine weapon, and then tosses it to the thief, who holds it to Gawain's neck along with the dagger.

GAWAIN

Please.

SCAVENGER

Please?

GAWAIN
Leave me something. I have far to
go. I am on a quest.

SCAVENGER

You said you weren't a knight.

GAWAIN

But I will be.

SCAVENGER

Maybe. Maybe not.

By now he's wandered over to the horse. He sees the axe handle and its inlaid jewels, and his eyes light up. He grabs it and pulls it out, but it immediately falls out of his grasp, falling to the ground with the weight of an immovable boulder. Grunting, he tries to pick it up, but his attempts are in vain. He motions for his thief friend with the club to help him. They try to move it together but cannot.

Gawain just watches, knowing there is nothing he can do.

GAWAIN
Just tell me then...is there
really a chapel?

The scavenger laughs and gestures to the trees, the stones, the creek itself.
 
33.

SCAVENGER

...You are in it!


EXT. STREAM - DAY

Gawain lays on the ground, stripped of his armor, BOUND, wrists and ankles TIED behind him with his own bridle, his mouth GAGGED with a knotted rag torn from his own shift.

The Scavenger has tied a rope around Gryngelot's saddle and is trying to use him to pull the axe. It doesn't seem to be working. Poor Gryngelot might as well be tied to a post.

Gawain struggles, but they pay him no mind.


EXT. STREAM - AFTERNOON

The sun as moved lower in the sky. Shadows growing longer.

Gawain is still bound, but he is longer struggling, having worn himself out. The knots are too well tied.

He pants breathlessly through his gag, watching hopelessly as the the thieves are trying to pick the jewels out of the axe now. Doesn't seem to be working.


EXT. STREAM - EVENING

Crickets are chirping now as the sun sinks into a general redness past the trees. Night is coming.

Gawain is ALONE. Still tied up. He is laying very still.

The axe lays on the ground. The thieves never managed to take it.

Gryngelot grazes nearby. He looks at Gawain, and then wanders away, heading downstream.

Gawain watches him go.

Soon the horse is out of sight.

Gawain has been abandoned.

He despairs. Throwing his head back, quite nearly weeping through his gag. He thinks about his fate, out here in the woods.

We PAN AWAY FROM HIM...
 
34.

...moving 360 degrees, through the seasons. Panning from winter to spring to summer...

...and then we complete the revolution and find Gawain's skeleton laying on the ground, still tied with those old strings. His bones have been picked clean.

We hold on this prognostication for a moment, and then pan back

the way we came....

...until we land on Gawain once more, tied up in the woods on this wintry eve, terrified at what the future might hold for him if he doesn't break free.

This vision compels him. He rallies his strength once more. With newfound vigor, he STRUGGLES against his binds, rolling over, thrashing about, kicking his conjoined legs. It's no use. The knots are firm.

But as he lays there on his belly, panting, he sees...

THE AXE.

An idea occurs to him.

He begins to squirm his way along the ground. It's slow going.

He looks like an inchworm, flopping his way towards the axe.

He makes it there and positions his body just so, so that the rope on his wrists catches ever so slightly on the axe blade. He begins to rub the binding back and forth against the sharp edge.

It's going pretty well at first - the rope is fraying - until his hands slip and the blade digs into the meat of thumb, slicing right down to his wrist. He cries out in pain. Blood gushes out, pooling in the dirt.

He recovers from the pain and keeps working at it.

Finally the cord is cut and and his hands go free. He sits up and squeezes his torn-open thumb.
